# CGP [0001]: Unfreeze Voter Rewards

- Date: 2020-05-12
- Author: @aslawson
- Status: DRAFT
- Governance Proposal ID #: 2
- Date Executed: [if executed]

## Overview

This change unfreezes voter rewards by setting the target voting yield in the EpochRewards smart contract. Currently target voting yield is 0 so the voter rewards are 0.  Once this value is set >0, voters will begin receiving rewards.  This provides incentive for users to maintain stake in the network and vote for validators they feel provide benefit to the network.

With this activation, the voter yield will be static as the adjustmentFactor will remain at 0.  The adjustmentFactor indicates the value to dynamically adjust the voting yield in response to the actual and target percentage of voting Celo Gold.  Given voter rewards are disabled right now, the current percentage of voting Celo Gold is likely lower than expected in steady state. In a later governance proposal, the adjustmentFactor will be set to enable this dynamic voting yield adjustment.  

Changes in parameters:

- targetVotingYieldParams.target: 0 --> 0.00016 ((x + 1) ^ 365 = 1.06)

This represents a value that will return 6% annual growth for voter rewards (as currently epoch rewards are distributed daily).  This was selected as a value that would be competitive with other proof-of-stake protocol yields and still be sustainable.

## Proposed Changes

1. Set Target Voting Yield
  - Destination: EpochRewards, [setTargetVotingYield](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/governance/EpochRewards.sol#L271)
  - Data: 160000000000000000000 (0.00016 * 10^24)
  - Value: 0 (NA)

## Verification

1. Confirm proposal steps: run `celocli governance:view --proposalID 2`

### Post-Execution Verification

1. Check that voting accounts locked gold increases after one epoch.  You can do so by running CeloCli tooling for [election:show](https://docs.celo.org/command-line-interface/election#show) or [lockedGold:show](https://docs.celo.org/command-line-interface/lockedgold#show_).
2. Check EpochReward values for [TargetVotingYieldParameters](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/governance/EpochRewards.sol#L52)

## Risks

Low risk -- if parameters were incorrect it could result in unexpectedly high or low voting yield, but risk is mitigated by capping at the max value 1.20 (20% annual growth).

## Useful Links

- [Rewards for Locked Gold Holders](https://docs.celo.org/celo-codebase/protocol/proof-of-stake/epoch-rewards/locked-gold-rewards)
