# CGP [0003]: Setting Frozen Part of Reserve cGLD

- Date: 2020-05-26
- Author(s): @MarkusBerlin, @rcroessmann, @aslawson
- Status: DRAFT
- Governance Proposal ID #: [if submitted]
- Date Executed: [if executed]

## Overview
This change sets the frozen cGLD parameters in the reserve.

Changes in parameters:

- frozenReserveGoldStartBalance: 0 --> 80000000000000000000000000
- frozenReserveGoldDays: 0 --> 548 (approx. 365 * 1.5 = 18 months)

The total amount of cGLD allocated to the reserve is 120m. The initial frozen cGLD amount will be 80m (`frozenReserveGoldStartBalance`) which leaves about 40m initially unfrozen.  50% of the unfrozen cGLD will be transferred to a reserve custodian account early on (respecting the 5% daily spending limit) to have it readily available.

To not put too much selling pressure on cGLD, the remaining Gold will be linearly unfrozen over the course of 18 months (`frozenReserveGoldDays`) starting from the day that this proposal is executed.

## Proposed Changes

1. Set Reserve Frozen Gold Parameters
 - Destination: Reserve, [setFrozenGold](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/stability/Reserve.sol#L153)
 - Data: 80000000000000000000000000 (80,000,000 * 10^18), 548
 - Value: 0 (NA)

## Verification

1. Confirm proposal steps: run `celocli governance:view --proposalID x` // TODO add proposal ID once submitted proposal

### Post-Execution Verification

1. Check Reserve values for [frozenReserveGoldStartBalance](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/stability/Reserve.sol#L44), [frozenReserveGoldStartDay](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/stability/Reserve.sol#L45), [frozenReserveGoldDays](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/stability/Reserve.sol#L46)

## Risks

- At launch of the protocol, 120m cGLD were allocated to the Celo reserve which currently make up a large percentage of the total Celo reserve value. Freezing part of that reserve cGLD via this proposal is intended to allow bootstrapping the non-cGLD Celo reserve in a controlled way over an extended period of time thereby reducing the risk of sharp increases of floating cGLD supply. 
- Freezing cGLD reduces the amount of available reserve assets early on.  This could enhance the risk that occurs when a demand decrease for stablecoins (cUSD) exceeds the total value of the (now reduced) exchangeable assets in the reserve.

## Useful Links

* [Stability WhitePaper](https://celo.org/papers/Celo_Stability_Analysis.pdf)
