# CGP [0004]: Setting Frozen Part of Reserve CELO

- Date: 2020-06-11
- Author(s): @MarkusBerlin, @rcroessmann, @aslawson
- Status: DRAFT
- Governance Proposal ID #: [if submitted]
- Date Executed: [if executed]

## Overview
This change sets the frozen CELO (formerly known as Celo Gold, i.e. cGLD) parameters in the reserve.

Changes in parameters:

- frozenReserveGoldStartBalance: 0 --> 80000000000000000000000000
- frozenReserveGoldDays: 0 --> 548 (approx. 365 * 1.5 = 18 months)

To help stabilize the value of Celo stabilized assets, the protocol is supported by a component called a reserve. The reserve consists of a basket of cryptocurrencies that helps the protocol to reduce the supply of Celo Dollars (cUSD).

The total amount of CELO allocated to the reserve is 120m. The current target allocation for the reserve is 50% CELO, 30% BTC, 15% ETH, and 5% DAI. The reserve will reach this target over time, and this target allocation can be changed through governance. You can find more information [here](https://medium.com/celoorg/the-celo-reserve-faqs-f3f7cbb1991f). 

The initial frozen CELO amount will be 80m (`frozenReserveGoldStartBalance`) which leaves about 40m initially unfrozen. 50% of the unfrozen CELO will be transferred to a reserve custodian account early on (respecting the 5% daily spending limit) to have it readily available for diversifying into the other reserve assets.

To not put too much selling pressure on CELO, the remaining Gold will be linearly unfrozen over the course of 18 months (`frozenReserveGoldDays`) starting from the day that this proposal is executed.

To not put too much selling pressure on CELO, the rebalancing will happen gradually.  This is enforced by unfreezing the 80m frozen CELO linearly over the course of 18 months (`frozenReserveGoldDays`).  This begins starting from the day that this proposal is executed.


## Proposed Changes

1. Set Reserve Frozen Gold Parameters
 - Destination: Reserve, [setFrozenGold](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/stability/Reserve.sol#L153)
 - Data: 80000000000000000000000000 (80,000,000 * 10^18), 548
 - Value: 0 (NA)

## Verification

1. Confirm proposal steps: run `celocli governance:view --proposalID x` // TODO add proposal ID once submitted proposal

### Post-Execution Verification

1. Check Reserve values for [frozenReserveGoldStartBalance](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/stability/Reserve.sol#L44), [frozenReserveGoldStartDay](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/stability/Reserve.sol#L45), [frozenReserveGoldDays](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/stability/Reserve.sol#L46)

## Risks

- At launch of the protocol, 120m CELO were allocated to the Celo reserve which currently make up a large percentage of the total Celo reserve value. Freezing part of that reserve CELO via this proposal is intended to allow bootstrapping the non-CELO Celo reserve in a controlled way over an extended period of time thereby reducing the risk of sharp increases of floating CELO supply.
- Freezing CELO reduces the amount of available reserve assets early on.  This could enhance the risk that occurs when a demand decrease for stablecoins (cUSD) exceeds the total value of the (now reduced) exchangeable assets in the reserve.

## Useful Links

* [Stability WhitePaper](https://celo.org/papers/Celo_Stability_Analysis.pdf)
* [The Celo Reserve FAQs](https://medium.com/celoorg/the-celo-reserve-faqs-f3f7cbb1991f). 
