# CGP [0007P]: Enabling Celo Dollar transfers and activating the stability protocol

- Date: 2020-06-24
- Author(s): @MarkusBerlin, @rcroessmann, @aslawson
- Status: DRAFT
- Governance Proposal ID #: [if submitted]
- Date Executed: [if executed]

## Overview

Enabling Celo Dollar transfers and the stability protocol:
This change activates the Celo stability protocol by unfreezing the Exchange and StableToken contracts, effectively enabling Celo Dollar (cUSD) transfers and allowing cUSD/CELO trades with the reserve via the exchange contract. It does this by removing the Exchange and StableToken smart contracts from the Freezer contract's `isFrozen` map. 

At a high level, the Celo stability mechanism (usually referred to as CP-DOTO, the Constant Product Decentralised One-To-One Mechanism) allows users to create new Celo Dollars by sending one US Dollar worth of CELO to the reserve, or to burn Celo Dollars by redeeming them for one US Dollar worth of CELO. The mechanism uses a constant-product-market-maker model, inspired by the Uniswap system, to mitigate the depletion potential of the reserve by dynamically adjusting the on-chain price to one-sided trading. For more background on the stability mechanism, please refer to the [Documentation](https://docs.celo.org/celo-codebase/protocol/stability).

### Limiting initial on-chain liquidity:

The proposal also sets the exchange parameter reserveFraction to 0.1%. This value is chosen to limit the risk for the Celo reserve right after stability protocol activation, which is a period during which users are still setting up bots interacting with the stability mechanism and CELO/USD market liquidity is evolving.

The `reserveFraction` parameter allows to control the sensitivity of the on-chain CELO/cUSD price to one-sided trading via the exchange contract. The smaller this parameter, the smaller the resulting exchange mechanism uniswap-style tank sizes and therefore the larger the price reaction to one-sided trading. The benefit of setting a low `reserveFraction` of 0.1% initially is that this reduces the depletion potential of the reserve should there be imprecise CELO/USD oracle rates and/or manipulated CELO/USD market prices because the on-chain price adjusts quickly to one-sided trading. The downside is a reduced cUSD expansion and contraction potential and that, until this parameter is increased via a future governance proposal, only small trades with the exchange contract should be executed to avoid extensive slippage. 
For more background on the effects of the reserveFraction parameter, please see the [Celo Stability Analysis](https://celo.org/papers/Celo_Stability_Analysis.pdf), especially sections 4.3.2 and 4.3.3.   

## Proposed Changes

1. Remove Exchange smart contract from the Freezer
  - Destination: Freezer, [unfreeze](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/common/Freezer.sol#L27)
  - Data: 0x67316300f17f063085Ca8bCa4bd3f7a5a3C66275 (Exchange Address)
  - Value: 0 (NA)

 2. Remove StableToken smart contract from the Freezer
  - Destination: Freezer, [unfreeze](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/common/Freezer.sol#L27)
  - Data: 0x765DE816845861e75A25fCA122bb6898B8B1282a (StableToken Address)
  - Value: 0 (NA)

3. Set Reserve Fraction to 0.1%
  - Destination: Exchange, [setReserveFraction](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/stability/Exchange.sol#L240)
  - Data: 1000000000000000000000 (1/1000 * 10^24 = 1e21) 
  - Value: 0 (NA)

## Verification

1. Confirm proposal steps: run `celocli governance:view --proposalID x` // TODO add proposal ID once submitted proposal
2. Confirm Exchange and StableToken addresses: run `celocli network:contracts`

### Post-Execution Verification

1. Check that an account can transfer cUSD to another account.  You can do so by running [celocli transfer:dollars](https://docs.celo.org/command-line-interface/transfer#dollars)
2. Check that an account can exchange cUSD-for-CELO and CELO-for-cUSD.  You can do so by running [celocli exchange:dollars](https://docs.celo.org/command-line-interface/exchange#dollars) or [celocli exchange:gold](https://docs.celo.org/command-line-interface/exchange#gold)

## Risks

- Oracle rate risk: In case of imprecise CELO/USD oracle rates and/or manipulated CELO/USD market rates, users could exchange cUSD or CELO with the reserve at a price that does not reflect the current market valuation. This could negatively affect the reserve collateralization ratio and therefore long-term cUSD stability in two ways: First, a user could mint X cUSD while providing less than X USD worth of reserve collateral and second, a user could redeem Y cUSD for more than Y USD worth of reserve collateral. The major mitigant of this risk is the initial reduction of the `reserveFraction` parameter as explained in the overview section which comes at the cost of the risks described further below. Additional mitigants include oracle client features like a circuit breaker protecting against unreasonably large price movements. 
- On-chain liquidity risk: With a low `reserveFraction`, bigger trades with the exchange could lead to a significant slippage and therefore to losses of users who try to sell seizable amounts of cUSD and/or CELO to the reserve over a short period of time. Until the `reserveFraction` parameter is increased via a future governance proposal, only small trades with the exchange contract should be executed to avoid extensive slippage.
- cUSD price risk: Due to the low initial `reserveFraction` parameter, the initial expansion and contraction potential of cUSD supply is low which could lead to slow adjustments of cUSD supply after cUSD demand shocks. The impact of this is that it could take longer for cUSD to regain the peg after an extensive cUSD demand shock compared to a setup with a large `reserveFraction` parameter.

## Useful Links

* [Stability WhitePaper](https://celo.org/papers/Celo_Stability_Analysis.pdf)
* [The Celo Reserve FAQs](https://medium.com/celoorg/the-celo-reserve-faqs-f3f7cbb1991f). 
* [The Celo Expansion & Contraction Mechanism](https://medium.com/celoorg/zooming-in-on-the-celo-expansion-contraction-mechanism-446ca7abe4f)
