# CGP [0009]: Extend the Governance Referendum Stage Duration 

- Date: 2020-05-11
- Author(s): @aslawson
- Status: DRAFT
- Governance Proposal ID #: [if submitted]
- Date Executed: [if executed]

## Overview

The on chain governance process has been running at an expedited rate in order to activate features and fine tune parameters in these early stages following the mainnet launch.  The original intent had been to start with this faster cadence and eventually slow it down.  In addition, the greater Celo community has expressed a desire to have more time to review, debate, and vote on proposals.

This proposal attempts to take the first step toward this process by extending the referendum (voting) stage by 3 days to a total of 5 days.  This will give stakeholders more time to review, voice concerns, and vote.  It will also increase the chance that all stages occur during the week, especially execution, as it results in a week-long total lifecycle. 

Changes in parameters:

- stageDurations.referendum: 172800 (2 * DAY) --> 432000 (5 * DAY)

where DAY (seconds/day) = 60 * 60 * 24 = 86400

Example Proposal Timeline:
Monday - Propose
Tuesday - Dequeued to Approval
Wednesday - Referendum (voting)
Thursday - Referendum (voting)
--- Additional referendum time ---
Friday - Referendum (voting)
Saturday - Referendum (voting)
Sunday - Referendum (voting)
Monday - Execute

This proposal is not intended to completely solve all cadence issues but as a step toward improvement.  Future steps may include altering the durations of other stages and/or even revisiting the entire lifecycle of a proposal holistically.  Please see [Governance 2.0 Ideas](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_aLO9xnO6ho02BuFGTReuNsDWMEhDS4Omsc48CiN4O8/edit?usp=sharing) document to review ideas and contribute thoughts.

## Proposed Changes

1. Set Governance Referendum Stage Duration
  - Destination: Governance, [setReferendumStageDuration](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/governance/Governance.sol#L308)
  - Data: 432000
  - Value: 0 (NA)

## Verification

1. Confirm proposal steps: run `celocli governance:view --proposalID X` //TODO update with proposal ID
2. Confirm current stage durations via [getReferendumStageDuration](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/governance/Governance.sol#L7785)

### Post-Execution Verification

1. Run the celocli tool [governance:view](https://docs.celo.org/command-line-interface/governance#view) on a newly dequeued proposal and confirm that the `secondsUntilStages.expiration` is 777600 = 9 days (1 Approval + 5 Referendum + 3 Execution)
2. Check Governance contract value via [getReferendumStageDuration](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/governance/Governance.sol#L7785)

## Risks

- If the times calculated are incorrect, there could be unexpected behavior in the referendum stage duration.

## Useful Links

* [Celo Gold Holders: Make Your Voice Heard Through On-chain Governance](https://medium.com/celoorg/celo-gold-holders-make-your-voice-heard-through-on-chain-governance-96cb5a1e8b90) -- blogpost with high level overview of governance stages
* [Celo Docs - Governance](https://docs.celo.org/celo-codebase/protocol/governance) -- more in depth explanation of each phase
