# CGP [0009]: Extend the Governance Referendum Stage Duration 

- Date: 2020-05-11
- Author(s): @aslawson
- Status: DRAFT
- Governance Proposal ID #: [if submitted]
- Date Executed: [if executed]

## Overview

The on chain governance process has been running at a temporary expedited rate in order to activate features and fine tune parameters in these early stages following the mainnet launch.  Though the intent is to eventually extend all stage durations, the expedited rate is still needed for some key features.

That being said, the 5 day candence has posed its own difficulties:

1. The urgency for community involvement (eg. while voting in the referendum stage) causes pressure to get all stakeholders informed quickly. In addition, it causes pressure on the stakeholders to review the proposal and make their decision quickly.
2. The 5 day cadence means it is nearly unavoidable to have a stage occuring on the weekend.

This proposal attempts to alleviate the above concerns by extending the referendum (voting) stage by 3 days.  This will give stakeholders more time to review, voice concerns, and vote.  It will also increase chance that all stages occur during the week, especially execution.  With few proposals in the queue, they are likely to get dequeued as soon as possible resulting in the execution time being one full week from the proposal time.

Changes in parameters:

- stageDurations.referendum: 172800 (2 * DAY) --> 432000 (5 DAY)

where DAY (seconds/day) = 60 * 60 * 24 = 86400

Example Proposal Timeline:
Monday - Propose
Tuesday - Dequeued to Approval
Wednesday - Referendum (voting)
Thursday - Referendum (voting)
--- Additional referendum time ---
Friday - Referendum (voting)
Saturday - Referendum (voting)
Sunday - Referendum (voting)
Monday - Execute

## Proposed Changes

1. Set Governance Referendum Stage Duration
  - Destination: Governance, [setReferendumStageDuration](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/governance/Governance.sol#L308)
  - Data: 432000
  - Value: 0 (NA)

## Verification

1. Confirm proposal steps: run `celocli governance:view --proposalID X` //TODO update with proposal ID
2. Confirm current stage durations via [getReferendumStageDuration](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/governance/Governance.sol#L7785)

### Post-Execution Verification

1. Run the celocli tool [governance:view](https://docs.celo.org/command-line-interface/governance#view) on a newly dequeued proposal and confirm that the `secondsUntilStages.expiration` is 777600 = 9 days (1 Approval + 5 Referendum + 3 Execution)
2. Check Governance contract value via [getReferendumStageDuration](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/de09a44f5ea2c2116506a6b3d05dcaaef92d4fad/packages/protocol/contracts/governance/Governance.sol#L7785)

## Risks

- This change doesn't guarantee a one week cadence but rather increases the likelihood of a more predictable cadence.  This is because of the following 2 points:
- Various actions trigger dequeue.  Creating a proposal itself triggeres a dequeue action, so the proposal must wait the full `dequeueFrequency` (currently 1 Day).  The first action after `dequeueFrequency` duration has passed will trigger the deque and start the rest of the cadence from that dequeued timestamp.
- If there are more proposal in the queue than the `concurrentProposals` (currently 3), then its possible a proposal will not be high enough in the queue to be dequeued within 1 day.
- If the times calculated are incorrect, there could be unexpected behavior in the referendum stage duration.

## Useful Links

* [Celo Gold Holders: Make Your Voice Heard Through On-chain Governance](https://medium.com/celoorg/celo-gold-holders-make-your-voice-heard-through-on-chain-governance-96cb5a1e8b90) -- blogpost with high level overview of governance stages
* [Celo Docs - Governance](https://docs.celo.org/celo-codebase/protocol/governance) -- more in depth explanation of each phase
