# CGP [0013]: Celo Core Contracts Release 1

- Date: 2020-10-16
- Author(s): @nambrot
- Status: DRAFT
- Governance Proposal ID #: 13
- Date Executed: [if executed]

## Overview

In this governance proposal, we propose to complete the first Celo Core Contracts Upgrade. This release debuts a new [release process](https://docs.celo.org/community/release-process/smart-contracts) that culminates in this proposal. The goal of this new release process is to enable more agile changes to the [Celo Core Contracts](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/tree/master/packages/protocol/contracts) while prioritizing reliability and security of the whole Celo platform. cLabs engineers have taken the lead and invested significant effort in verification tooling in the past months to allow Celo stakeholders to assert the validity of the proposal itself. See more under [Verification](#Verification)

Changes that are being proposed in this release are described in [this Github release](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/releases/tag/celo-contracts-v1.rc1). OpenZeppelin audited all core Celo contracts and found no “critical” or “high” severity issues. The audit report can be found [here](https://blog.openzeppelin.com/celo-contracts-audit/#phase-3).

## Proposed Changes

This Celo Core Contracts Upgrade proposal is special since it operationalizes the new [release process](https://docs.celo.org/community/release-process/smart-contracts). As part of the new versioning schema, most Celo Core Contracts added a `getVersionNumber` function which changed the bytecode of all implementations. For that reason, this proposal contains transactions to update the implementation contract of these contracts' proxies.

1. AccountsProxy `setImplementation`
2. AttestationsProxy `setImplementation`
3. DoubleSigningSlasherProxy `setImplementation`
4. ElectionProxy `setImplementation`
5. EpochRewardsProxy `setImplementation`
6. EscrowProxy `setImplementation`
7. ExchangeProxy `setImplementation`
8. GasPriceMinimumProxy `setImplementation`
9. GoldTokenProxy `setImplementation`
10. GovernanceProxy `setImplementation`
11. LockedGoldProxy `setImplementation`
12. RandomProxy `setImplementation`
13. ReserveProxy `setImplementation`
14. SortedOraclesProxy `setImplementation`
15. StableTokenProxy `setImplementation`
16. UsingPrecompilesProxy `setImplementation`
17. ValidatorsProxy `setImplementation`

Regular features that were being added or bugs that were fixed are described in the [Github release](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/releases/tag/celo-contracts-v1.rc1). Since the major version of these Celo Core Contracts changed due to the version change, no separate transactions will reflect the "regular" changes. One exception to that is the newly added `DowntimeSlasher`:

1. Registry `setAddressFor` DowntimeSlasher
2. DowntimeSlasherProxy `setAndInitializeImplementation`:
    registryAddress: 0x000000000000000000000000000000000000ce10
    _penalty: 100000000000000000000
    _reward: 10000000000000000000
    _slashableDowntime: 8640

The initializtion data can be found in [this gist](https://gist.github.com/nambrot/dd4dfb600262148c6c05d38ef6b0878b).

```json
{
  "DowntimeSlasher": ["0x000000000000000000000000000000000000ce10", "100000000000000000000", "10000000000000000000", "8640"]
}
```

Since this release is larger than usual and includes a bit more complexity, it is crucial for Celo stakeholders to follow the verification steps below.

## Verification

This section follows the process as prescribed in [Smart Contract Release Process](https://docs.celo.org/community/release-process/smart-contracts#release-process).

Any Celo stakeholder can fetch the proposal as a JSON file by running

```bash
celocli governance:show --proposalID 13 --jsonTransactions "upgrade_proposal.json"
```

With that proposal, any Celo stakeholder can run the following script:

```bash
# (from the `protocol` package in the `celo-monorepo`)
RELEASE="celo-core-contracts-v1.rc1"
NETWORK=${"baklava"|"alfajores"|"mainnet"}
# A -f boolean flag can be provided to use a forno full node to connect to the provided network
yarn verify-release -p "upgrade_proposal.json" -b $RELEASE -n $NETWORK -f
```

With this script, any Celo stakeholder can verify that the proposal will result in Celo Core Contracts bytecode that matches the release tag (which stakeholders can verify that it matches the audited commit in the [OpenZeppelin report](https://blog.openzeppelin.com/celo-contracts-audit/#phase-3))

## Risks

This proposal is the first governance proposal on Celo mainnet to significantly changing Celo Core Contracts beyond simple parameter updates. Celo Core Contracts are critical for the functioning of the Celo Platform. This proposal touches all of the contracts which impact Celo's Proof-of-Stake and consensus, the stability and identity protocol and Governance itself. While cLabs have invested significant efforts to expand testing and verification tooling, and a third party audit has been completed, errors in this proposal could lead to situations that are only recoverable with a very difficult hard fork.

## Useful Links

* [Celo Core Contracts Release Process](https://docs.celo.org/community/release-process/smart-contracts)
* [Github release](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/releases/tag/celo-contracts-v1.rc1)
* [OpenZeppelin Audit Report](https://blog.openzeppelin.com/celo-contracts-audit/#phase-3)
* [Forum post about the upgrade](https://forum.celo.org/t/governance-proposals-to-make-the-protocol-safe-and-easy-to-upgrade/615)
* [Github Ticket tracking progress of the release](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/issues/4812)
