# CGP [0014]:  Distribute CELO to cUSD holders

- Date: 2020-10-25
- Author(s): @Jbsibille, @ewilz
- Status: PROPOSED
- Discussions-To: https://forum.celo.org/t/governance-proposal-to-reward-early-users/662/26
- Governance Proposal ID #: 16
- Date Executed: [if executed]

## Overview

This proposal enables the distribution of CELO to verified users of the protocol, based on their cUSD holdings.

The main goal of this reward is to incentivize early cUSD adopters with a long term stake into the network.

Additional goals include:
1. Distribute CELO as widely as possible across the network to enable individuals with modest balances to participate in the long term health of the network.
2. Encourage cUSD liquidity in order to attract more users and developers to the network.

A previous version of this proposal suggested running a proposal by the community for each distribution of the rewards. 
This updated proposal aims to fund a minimum viable initiative for this program and delegate the exact initial distribution strategy to a 2 out of 3 multisig with 3 key-holders who would act on behalf of the community.

We believe it is better to delegate initial distribution strategy to a multi-sig because:
- It is a better user experience to distribute funds on a daily or weekly basis. It would bring significant overhead if we needed to run a community proposal for each of these distributions.
- It enables the key-holders of the multi-sig to agree on short-term iterations to the distribution strategy (e.g. increase or decrease rewards amounts) based on initial reception of the rewards, without having to go through a governance proposal for each of them. Being nimble in our approach will be key to the success of this rewards program.

Addresses of users that have verified their phone number with at least 3 attestations and that hold a minimum balance (initially 20cUSD) will be eligible to receive these rewards, up to a maximum eligible balance (we initially propose to cap rewards on 500 cUSD balances). 
We are expecting initial targeting to be based on on-chain data only. Further iterations might leverage Valora-specific data in order to accelerate execution and learnings. This is so that the multi-sig key holders have this as an option if it allows them to learn faster within the scope of this initial grant, in a way that would benefit the entire community (e.g. if they wanted to quickly try an invite-based rewards mechanism).
Depending on uptake and community feedback, eligibility criteria may be reassessed. We will publish changes to eligibility criteria ahead of time with the community via a forum post or blog post updates.

We initially propose funding this initiative with 200,000 CELO, i.e. 5.4% of the community fund as of Dec 21st, 2020. We believe this would enable us to iterate on the rewards for a period of ~2 months (for context, the community fund grows 200k CELO every ~ 2 weeks).

Performing the distribution will happen in a few steps.
1. Determine eligible addresses and rewards based on chain data from preceding week. Publish this as a merkle tree. The code and input data will be public so that the community can verify these details. 
2. Deploy a merkle distributor contract containing the root of the published merkle tree.
3. Fund this specific merkle distributor contract with total rewards to be delivered this week from the community fund transferred by the multi-sig
4. Transfer CELO to each eligible address using the merkle distributor contract. 

Proposed key holders to the multi-sig:

- 0x73c3c8F9C99E846DBd74306b07cDf2A8082b0493 | Asa Oines | cLabs Employee
- 0x9702E8dEa1425A55bfa0a1Ae1C82486b54db9120 | Keefer Taylor acting on behalf of Tessellated Geometry LLC | Celo Validator
- 0x85aC32B54Ab6b5a5b101caBd211CDd2979b9A918 | Patrick Baron | Celo Validator

## Proposed Changes

1. Transfer `200000 * (10 ** 18)` CELO to multsig wallet at `<address>`.
  - Destination: GoldToken, approve
  - Data: `0x7BDee323f5227F214EDFC3aE4BD4eBC032B59c82`, `200000000000000000000000` (200000e18)
  - Value: 0

In this execution, the governance proposal is approving 200k CELO allowance of the community fund (the governance address) to the multisig address rather than transferring the CELO fund to the multisg contract itself. This method allows flexibility in removing the allowance later if needed and de-risks lost funds if ever the multisig became inaccessible.

## Verification

The code and the input data used to generate the Merkle tree will be public so that the community can verify these details. 
The smart contract code will be public and verifiable, and the implementation and Merkle root will be immutable. 


## Risks

A risk this proposal introduces includes a potential loss of community funds if CELO is transferred to inaccessible Celo addresses. To mitigate this risk for the initial transfer, we will deploy the multisig ahead of time and do a test transfer to and from it.


## Useful Links

* Based on Uniswap's [merkle distributor code](https://github.com/Uniswap/merkle-distributor)
