# CGP [0016]: Update baselineQuorumFactor

- Date: 2020-12-01
- Author(s): @alecps
- Status: PROPOSED
- Governance Proposal ID #: 14
- Date Executed: [if executed]
- Discussions To: https://forum.celo.org/t/discussion-around-updating-governance-parameters/683

## Overview

This CGP is an effort to lower the barriers to passing governance proposals given current levels of voter engagement. We propose a decrease in the `baselineQuorumFactor`, the proportion of the historical average voter participation level that constitutes quorum for governance proposals, from `1` to `0.5`.

The mechanics of the `baselineQuorumFactor` are as follows. The `baseline` is an exponential moving average of final participation in past governance proposals, and the `baselineQuorumFactor` is simply the proportion of that average participation level that constitutes quorum. That is, `baseline * baselineQuorumFactor = quurom`. If participation is below quorum, the difference is treated as "no" votes against the proposal. The proposal then passes if the Yes/No ratio is higher than the threshold specified by the governance constitution given the contents of the proposal.

The rationale for lowering the `baselineQuorumFactor` is that it will immediately lower the baseline quorum which is currently too high to reliably pass governance proposals. The decision to lower the value to `0.5` is informed by the current voter participation level that we can assume will reliably vote for governance proposals when they are needed.

## Proposed Changes

1. Set `baselineQuorumFactor` to `0.5`

- Destination: Governance [setBaselineQuorumFactor](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/master/packages/protocol/contracts/governance/Governance.sol#L395)
- Data: 500000000000000000000000 (1/2 \* 10^24 = 5e+23)
- Value: 0

## Verification

1. Confirm proposal: run `celocli governance:view --proposalID <proposalID>`
2. Confirm Execution: run `celocli network:parameters --node https://forno.celo.org`

## Risks

Lowering the `baselineQuorumFactor` will decrease the amount of Celo needed to pass a governance proposal on the network. While this is the intended effect, it comes with an increased risk of malicious governance proposals being forced through without consensus from the community. This risk remains quite small and a sufficiently diversified quorum of Celo holders must still agree on a proposal for it to pass. Moreover, the approval stage provides protection against malicious proposals.

Another risk is that future governance proposals will consistently pass with participation levels close to the newly decreased baseline, causing the baseline to decrease with each proposal. For example, if this proposal reduces the baseline by 50% and the next proposal has close to minimum participation, then the new average historical participation level after that proposal will be even lower than 50% of it's current level. To prevent the baseline from decreasing indefinitely in this way, we must be able to pass most proposals with participation levels that are well above the baseline. Because large Celo holders usually vote on proposals, this risk is small. Moreover, we feel it is outweighed by the benefits of being able to pass important proposals with lower participation on the rare occasion that a key Celo holder fails to vote.

## Useful Links

- [Celo Forum Discussion](https://forum.celo.org/t/discussion-around-updating-governance-parameters/683)
- [Celo Docs -- Participation Parameters](https://docs.celo.org/developer-guide/summary/interfaces/_wrappers_governance_.participationparameters)
