# CGP [0017]: Activation of Celo Community Fund

- Date: 2020-12-01
- Author(s): @devme25 @patricknbaron @DeeM297
- Status: DRAFT
- Governance Proposal ID #: [if submitted]
- Date Executed: [if executed]
- Discussion to: [Celo Forum Post](https://forum.celo.org/t/discussion-for-cgp-0017-activation-of-celo-community-fund/692)

## Overview

### 1. Goal
**Mission**: The Celo Community Fund’s mission is to support those who are building a financial system that creates conditions of prosperity for everyone. 

We propose to fund a diverse set of projects to help in achieving Celo’s mission. There might be some overlap with Celo Foundation’s funding process but the Celo Community Fund (CCF) will help:

*   Foster of a healthy ecosystem
*   Support decentralization
*   Provide a quicker turnaround on applications as there will be less friction without the need to coordinate with Celo Foundation

### 2. Progressive Decentralization
One of the feedbacks we got from the community was the complexity in the structure of the constitution and plan. We have simplified the proposal by avoiding highly structured constitutional documents and processes.

We will instead focus on creating a simple proposal that can be voted on by the community so that we can get it passed. The primary goal is to help enable quality projects that need funding. 

In the early days, as we build the ecosystem, we will start with a simpler process by electing the stewards and give them the ability to make decisions on a pre-approved amount of CELO. This will help alleviate the current tension of not having enough voter turnouts for Celo Governance Proposals. The current Celo Governance Process has high threshold requirements and a lot of coordination is required to get proposals to pass. In addition, it doesn't meet the needs of the CCF where additional time is required by the stewards to vet projects before bringing them to vote. 

By having this simpler process, we can avoid having to rally the entire community to vote on all Community Fund proposals, some of which might be requesting a small amount, for e.g., A university student requesting 1,000 cUSD to host a Celo educational Meetup.

While we do give the power to the stewards, trust has to be earned over time. So this proposal will set forth some controls in place to avoid misbehavior/bias by the stewards. For instance, having a recourse process for CCF applicants if they disagree with the decision of the stewards.

### 3. Implementation
We want to create an easy process in order to activate the CCF without having to build a complicated governance process that may or may not work. Instead, the plan is to start working with a simple process, learn as we grow, and then use the lessons to create a robust decentralized process later on. 

The following is the process we are recommending:

*   **2-of-3 smart contract**: that is controlled by the elected stewards. 
*   **Governance smart contract owned**: The Governance smart contract would approve the funds requested by the stewards.  If required, CELO owners have the ability to withdraw the approval of funds that have not yet been moved.
*   **Implementation**: We plan to get support from cLabs to deploy a multisig contract and perform the ERC20 approval for the funds we are requesting to the deployed multisig. 
*   **Entity**: We will request help from the legal and regulatory team at Celo Foundation to help set up an appropriate entity.

### 4. Stewards and Applicants
The role of the stewards will be to:

*   Conduct community outreach to get projects built on Celo.
*   Manage the assessment of the applicants and their projects based on their mission, technical ability & merit, and integrity.
*   Capture the lessons learned and build a constitution to help the current and future operations of the Celo Community fund. We will use the document - [CCF v1](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15xkmj6mXaLAjNcdvGX3PKGM3aanuvVL1IYXeWHvfxBs/edit#) - to guide us.

The applicants will complete an application form similar to that used by Celo Foundation and the stewards will vet the projects to the best of their abilities either by themselves or, if needed, getting feedback from appropriate experts.

The stewards will publish information about approved applications such as - team, proposed use of funds, and amount funded. Declined applications can expect to receive private feedback.   

If a proposer feels that they were unfairly denied funding from the steward’s budget, then the  conflict resolution process would be for them to submit a spend proposal via CGP for all CELO owners to vote on.


### 5. CGP Vote

#### 5.1 Smart Contract

*   2-of-3 multi-signature smart contract that is controlled by the elected stewards. Our proposal is to have three stewards within our group. 
*   The 2-of-3 CCF smart contract will be owned by the Governance smart contract so that CELO owners can claw back CELO via CGP, if required.

#### 5.2 Term
*   The following members would like to nominate themselves for the role of the stewards:
    *   Deepak Nuli, Founder at MultiSig, a boutique security consulting company in the blockchain space.
    *   Patrick Baron, Founder at Validator Capital and Moola, a Celo validator group and money market protocol.
    *   Dee, Usopp.Club, a genesis Celo validator group and a grateful producer of the first block of the chain.
*   The term we propose is until funds are spent with a goal of dispersing our budget to qualified projects within 6 months after the elections and appropriate steward entity is created.

#### 5.3 Voting on the Proposal and the Stewards
We are asking the community to vote both - on the proposal and for the stewards - at the same time under one proposal. This is due the to following reasons:

1. **Prevent voter fatigue**: by making them vote on two things. It’ll be easy to rally the Celo community behind one CGP.
2. **Keep the Celo Community Fund flexible**: A community member brought up this idea during a meeting - of being open to funding different steward teams. That is, we (Deepak, Patrick, and Dee) are applying as stewards and are requesting a certain amount to disperse. Another steward team could also make a similar proposal to use a part of the fund if needed.

#### 5.4 CCF Thesis
In response to the feedback from the community, we have decided to narrow down our focus again to a few areas that we believe will have the greatest impact on Celo achieving product market fit. Those areas are on/off ramps, community tools, and research/education.

**On/off ramps:** CELO/fiat or cUSD/fiat CLOB exchange pairs (e.g. OKCoin), fiat-to-crypto software (e.g. Simplex), P2P platforms (e.g. Paxful), wallet integrations, point-of-sale integrations, e-commerce integrations, etc.

**Community tools:** Desktop/browser/hardware wallets, developer tools, governance voting applications, block explorers, validator metrics dashboards, etc.

**Research & Education:** Support people and projects that want to conduct research and/or create educational content, host Celo related talks, etc. This can include both technical and non-technical areas relevant to Celo.

**Other:** In addition to the above three areas, we will be open to considering other great teams/projects that might be beneficial to Celo’s mission/ecosystem.

#### 5.5 Funding Projects*
We will target projects that we believe will be able to deliver measurable key results in exchange for 20k-33k CELO. We will target funding 30 projects which would give an average funding amount of 22,180. This parameter set would enable us to for example, fund 10 small projects (<5,000 CELO), 15 projects of medium size (~22,180 CELO), and 2 large projects (>40,000 CELO). These targets are not set in stone.

* assuming a USD/CELO price of 1.77. Note: The price of CELO is always changing based on market conditions. The price was calculated in Dec 2020 as an average of 90 days.

#### 5.6 Communication
Within 24 hours of funding a proposal, we will disclose the amount, team, and use of funds. We will maintain a public spreadsheet with the following information for community fund recipients: project name, website/github, recipient name(s), funding date, funding amount, use of funds. On a quarterly basis we will provide a consolidated on the progress of community fund recipients.

#### 5.7 Budget Request
*   Amount: 665,387 CELO (Approximately 15% of the fund)
*   Management Fee: 10% + Incorporation fee (if needed)

Note: 

*   We increased the amount to account of 3 stewards while we had only 2 stewards in the prior version of the proposal.
*   This works out to compensation of ~$127 /hr/steward assuming:
    *   6 months of work is required 
    *   USD price of CELO = 1.77
    *   Stewards work 50 hours/month 
    *   3 stewards 
    *   Less than $450/month in operational expenses 

## Proposed Changes
ERC-20 Approval of 665,387 * (10 ** 18) CELO to multsig wallet at 0x2f90Bb1CAF4079192481B1A7F3088220d291456D
Destination: GoldToken, approve
Data: 0x2f90Bb1CAF4079192481B1A7F3088220d291456D, 665387000000000000000000 (665387e18)
Value: 0

In this execution, the governance proposal is approving 665,387 CELO allowance of the community fund (the governance address) to the multisig address rather than transferring the CELO fund to the multisg contract itself. This method allows flexibility in removing the allowance later if needed and de-risks lost funds if ever the multisig became inaccessible.

Multisig owners:
0x099f3F5527671594351E30B48ca822cc90778a11
0x202CeFd7A92F715D9d43e4715F220df048c49c68
0xD9eaEeA9b4AFccA934008429a1bC063C19518b6A

## Verification
All the transactions that the stewards will make will be visibile on chain using our multisig address - 0x2f90Bb1CAF4079192481B1A7F3088220d291456D and one can compare that with our public announcements.

## Risks
* **Loss of funds**: While we do give the power to the stewards, trust has to be earned over time. While we have done some work in the community prior to this proposal to build the trust, there is still a small risk. However, it is mitigated as all the three stewards are part of the Celo ecosystem without any prior relationship between them. They have a professional relationship through the Celo community.
* **Bias by the stewards**: If a proposer feels that they were unfairly denied funding from the steward’s budget, then the  conflict resolution process would be for them to submit a spend proposal via CGP for all CELO owners to vote on.
## Useful Links and Misc

## **Proposers**:

* Deepak Nuli, [Twitter](https://twitter.com/hinduhacker),  [Linkedin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/deepaknuli/)
* Patrick Baron, [Twitter](https://twitter.com/ValidatorCap),  [Linkedin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/patricknbaron/)
* Dee, [Twitter](https://twitter.com/UsoppClub)

### Bios:
**Patrick, General Partner of Validator Capital** Validator capital is a digital asset fund that manages assets on behalf of family offices, accredited individuals, and institutional Limited Partners.
Validator Capital is a certified master validator, receives foundation votes, and contributes to the price stability for cUSD.
Patrick is also building Moola, a money market protocol on Celo. He previously ran the Blockchain Consulting Group where he consulted for blockchain startups on fundraising and go-to-market strategy. He was previously President of Ambisafe, a security and utility token issuance platform where he helped clients raise more than $300m. He was previously cofounder of Hitfin an Ethereum powered derivatives trading platform.

He has published Blockchain 101 and Intro to Stablecoin web courses for the FinTech School and led educational workshops for executives and MBA classes from more than a dozen countries. Prior to crypto, he held quota carrying sales roles at a global retail bank, a solar energy company, and several SaaS companies. He earned a B.S. in Business from Wake Forest University.

**Deepak, Founder at MultiSig and Security at cLabs** MultiSig is a boutique security consulting company helping blockchain companies with operational security and incident response processes. He has been involved in the field of Information security for over 15 years with expertise in incident response, security operations, and social engineering.

Deepak got involved in the Celo community by helping lead the Validator Audits during the Celo’s stake off challenge. He later started helping cLabs build their security team from the ground up. He is involved with the Celo ecosystem and in the broader blockchain community. He was a mentor during Celo Camp Batch 2. He has been involved in the Crypto space since 2013 and considered raising a VC fund during 2016-17. He currently manages a private investment portfolio of over 25 investments. 

Previously, he has helped Fortune 500 companies with Incident response management and has conducted investigations of state sponsored breaches (APT intrusions). He holds a Bachelor’s degree in Computer Science (India) and a Master’s degree in Information Security (Purdue University).

**Dee, Usopp’s Club** Usopp’s Club is one of the genesis validators which launched the Celo blockchain in April 2020.
Dee is an entrepreneur who has worked as a Financial Controller and Founder. He has worked for leading French construction companies on large infrastructure projects ($50m+) in East and Central Africa. He was responsible for budgeting, variance analysis, and reporting on projects funded by the EU and World Bank. Dee is a self-taught coder who has built a complete Android application and created a popular wallet for a top 20 blockchain project. He has a Masters degree in Business Management (France).


**Version:** CCF v4

**Previous Document Versions and Community Comments**:  [CCF v1](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15xkmj6mXaLAjNcdvGX3PKGM3aanuvVL1IYXeWHvfxBs/edit#), [CCF v2](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pO1LYrQInyfs1lKPM6TW-1ph5YM2miVuoRjK0ZGT9ls/edit#), [CCF v3](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RYT7jUW1u0QHOO0QswYkDSSswsUZhyU3XcxbXdFtQkk/edit) 
