# CGP [0020]: Community Appreciation Gifts 

- Date: 2021-01-27
- Author(s): @nambrot
- Status: DRAFT
- Governance Proposal ID #: [if submitted]
- Date Executed: [if executed]
- Discussion to: https://forum.celo.org/t/discussions-for-cgp20-community-appreciation-gifts/750

## Overview

May 2020 saw the genesis of Celo the platform. But even before then, Celo the community has been an ecosystem from people all over the world believing in the mission of Celo and contributing to it. While much focus has been on folks that are employed by cLabs, there is a lot of effort that is currently not being appropriately appreciated more broadly. This proposal attempts to create a small channel for the community to express gratitude to its contributors.

Firstly, it should be noted that this is not intended for any kind of "proper" or "official" scheme. The goal is to show appreciation for folks contributing as soon as possible and future processes and structures are necessary and highly encouraged. This is also not intended as general spending/grants/investments by the community fund as per proposals such as [CGP17](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/blob/master/CGPs/0017.md). The target of these gifts are not community members seeking financial support from the community fund, but folks who have already been contributing for a host of other reasons without explicit compensation and funding. These grass-root efforts are the bedrock of any viable and lively community.

The low amount reflects the general lack of specificity as to how these gifts are distributed. A MVP could look as follows:

- Community elects a gift stewards with disbursement access
- Steward takes public and anonymous nominations for gifts
- Steward on a monthly basis announces and disburses gifts with the multisig in the amount of ~100 CELO each.

All of these parameters can and should be changed after iterations and feedback.

## Proposed Changes

1. Approve 15000 CELO to be spend by a MultiSig (`0x5374cF78F82E3610f9678bD7AF617785FF6c578a`) of 4 community members:

```
Destination: GoldToken, approve
Data: 0x5374cF78F82E3610f9678bD7AF617785FF6c578a, 15000000000000000000000 (15000e18)
Value: 0
```



## Verification

```
celocli multisig:show 0x5374cF78F82E3610f9678bD7AF617785FF6c578a
Owners: 
  0: 0x03F740a94Eb122CDaFEEf307949ECe62B2876B4a
  1: 0x756AE358f20Ce886dbB103Caa18576fB7889c7a3
  2: 0x2f8C72DF4F49A9D3fDe8f92E4f4535f85a7c4dDb
  3: 0x4052e0B46D5aaC73e9c07F961779176F0834d0e9
Required confirmations: 2 
Required confirmations (internal): 2 
Transactions: 1
```

- `0x03F740a94Eb122CDaFEEf307949ECe62B2876B4a` Nam Chu Hoai - `nambrot` on Discord
- `0x756AE358f20Ce886dbB103Caa18576fB7889c7a3` Alex Harley - `Alex | cLabs#1595` on Discord
- `0x2f8C72DF4F49A9D3fDe8f92E4f4535f85a7c4dDb` Trevor Porter - `trevor | cLabs#7502` on Discord
- `0x4052e0B46D5aaC73e9c07F961779176F0834d0e9` Connor McEwen - `cmcewen | cLabs#1540` on Discord

## Risks

Funds that are approved can be transferred to anyone who controls the keys to the multisig

## Useful Links

