# CGP [0023]: Oracle activation for cEUR and cEUR freezing

- Date: 2021-02-24
- Author(s): @martinvol
- Status: DRAFT
- Governance Proposal ID #: [if submitted]
- Date Executed: [if executed]

## Overview

This governance proposal enables oracle addresses to make them able to report the value of CELO/EUR for the cEUR contract, deployed on [CR3](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/blob/master/CGPs/0022.md). It also proposed to send 100 CELO to each of the oracles to cover gas fees for the first couple of years and freezing StableTokenEUR (cEUR) and ExchangeEUR.

Following [CR3](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/blob/master/CGPs/0022.md), cEUR will be in an status where it would be imposible to mint or burn due empty buckets that are not possible to update (assuming no oracle reports, but cEUR will be possible to move. Freezing is meant to prevent cEUR from moving before enabling the stability mechanism.

cEUR in circulation with no stability mechanism in place can lead to a depledge. Although the risk of cEUR moving before its full activation it's very low, this proposal will add an extra ledger of security. The only to address holding cEUR after CR3 is deployed will by the community fund (Governance Proxy) and a Celo Foundation wallet.

Please note this proposal shall be submited after CR3 is proposed, because it needs an address for StableTokenEUR, but it can be executed before or after.

[CGP #26](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/blob/master/CGPs/0022.md) was merged into this proposal after Baklava deployment.

## Proposed Changes

Fill out the following template for each transaction in the proposal

1. The first X transactions enable a specific address to report to StableTokenEUR
  - Destination: SortedOragles.addOracle
  - Data: first argument is the StableTokenEUR address (`0xD8763CBa276a3738E6DE85b4b3bF5FDed6D6cA73`) and the second one the address of the oracle to be added (TODO add address)
  - Value: 0
2. The following X transactions are to fund the oracles:
  - Destination: GoldToken.transfer
  - Data: first argument is the StableTokenEUR address and the second one the address of the oracle to be added (TODO add address)
  - Value: 100e18  (note the value field of the proposal it's actually `0`, as this was implemented as a token transfer)
3. Freezing StableTokenEUR
  - Destination: Freezer.freeze
  - Data: StableTokenEUR (`0xD8763CBa276a3738E6DE85b4b3bF5FDed6D6cA73`)
  - Value: 0
4. Freezing ExchangeEUR
  - Destination: Freezer.freeze
  - Data: ExchangeEUR (`0xE383394B913d7302c49F794C7d3243c429d53D1d`)
  - Value: 0
## Verification

Can be left as “TODO” until the proposal is made.

## Risks

- Adding new oracles the network will be more congested, which is not a problem at this stage but could become one as new stable assets and other projects deploy new oracles.
-  Oracle rate risk: In case of imprecise CELO/USD oracle rates and/or manipulated CELO/USD market rates, users could exchange cUSD or CELO with the reserve at a price that does not reflect the current market valuation. This could negatively affect the reserve collateralization ratio and therefore long-term cUSD stability in two ways: First, a user could mint X cUSD while providing less than X USD worth of reserve collateral and second, a user could redeem Y cUSD for more than Y USD worth of reserve collateral. The major mitigant of this risk is the initial reduction of the reserveFraction parameter as explained in the overview section which comes at the cost of the risks described further below. Additional mitigants include oracle client features like a circuit breaker protecting against unreasonably large price movements. (Same as [CGP #0007](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/blob/master/CGPs/0007.md))

## Useful Links

* [CIP 33 - Multi Currency Support](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/blob/master/CIPs/cip-0033.md)
