# CGP 30: Add voluntary carbon credits to the reserve

- Date: 2021-06-14
- Author(s): @MarkusBerlin
- Status: PROPOSED
- Governance Proposal ID #: 31
- Date Executed: [if executed]
- Discussions To: https://forum.celo.org/t/discussion-for-cgp-30-add-voluntary-carbon-credits-to-the-reserve/1097

## Overview

### The Reserve
This change adds another asset to the reserve portfolio: tokenized quality voluntary carbon credits to further the Celo mission of creating the conditions for prosperity for everyone, understanding that no prosperity is possible without protecting our natural world. Adding tokenized and quality voluntary carbon credit natural backed assets that correspond to projects protecting forests and our precious natural resources is expected to be the first of many such assets that will be added to the Reserve, and is a development that breaks new ground for blockchain platforms - merging innovative technology with actions that directly protect our natural world. . 

The Reserve is a diversified portfolio of cryptocurrencies and assets supporting the ability of the decentralized Celo protocol to expand and contract the supply of Celo stable assets via [Mento](https://docs.celo.org/celo-codebase/protocol/stability/doto) in-line with user demand, which also supports the stability of the Celo stable assets (including cUSD and cEUR). The current CELO, Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Dai Holdings in the Reserve are public. Please see celoreserve.org for more information about the current holdings.

The Celo whitepaper [link](https://celo.org/papers/whitepaper) discusses  the benefits of the Reserve and anticipated the addition of real world, tokenized assets: “as more assets get tokenized in the future, the partitioned reserve mechanism allows for the reserves to include real assets. This is helpful from a stability perspective, and also allows for natural-capital-backed means-of-payment currencies (for example, currencies backed by forestland), where the growth in demand for those currencies will increase the amount of natural capital backing them.” 

Adding uncorrelated assets to the reserve further diversifies technological and price risk. Adding tokenized carbon credits to the reserve is another step towards a nature backed currency. 

Reserve asset selection is completed through governance by the Celo community. Any new Reserve assets under consideration should be freely traded and settled 24/7 on (liquid) markets, and should be based on an open-source protocol. A primary upside of using crypto assets in the Reserve is that all transactions with the Reserve can occur on-chain, in a decentralized, fully-auditable way. Adding assets to the Reserve that are native to the Celo blockchain are preferred, as rebalancings (to governable target weights of the Reserve) can be done on-chain in future, in a decentralised, transparent (and cost-efficient) manner. 

Adding tokenized, high quality, voluntary carbon credit assets on Celo to the Reserve include several advantages to the Celo platform: 
Diversification of the risk factors within the Reserve improves and encourages stability;
Linking effective products that mitigate climate change to the growth of the overall Celo platform is beneficial for the planet;
In future rebalancing of assets that sit on Celo improve cost-efficiency and decentralisation of the Reserve;
Adding high-quality assets to the Reserve may benefit the asset itself, as the publicity encourages awareness from the larger Celo global community.

The Reserve issued a “Request for Proposal” on celoreserve.org, where issuers of tokenized carbon credit had and still have the chance to submit [proposals](https://celoreserve.org/assets/request_for_proposal_natural_backed_assets-april2021.1.pdf). 

This is an initial step towards a system that also includes a variety of nature backed assets, as the markets for tokenized nature backed assets currently is still very limited. Therefore we propose that the Reserve start to allocate a small fraction of the overall assets to this asset class. For the start, we would propose to allocate 0.5% of the overall reserve to this asset class in the mid term, taken out of the BTC portfolio (lowering this allocation to 29.5%). 

### The asset
MCO2 Tokens are blockchain-based tokens on Celo issued on a 1/1 parity, meaning that one token represents ownership of one carbon credit (i.e., a digital certificate in the voluntary market that attests the avoidance of the emission of 1 metric ton of GHG in carbon dioxide equivalent units) by Project Moss (https://moss.earth/). 
MOSS is an environmental platform that provides carbon credits transactions to individuals and companies of any size that want to offset their emissions and replied to the Reserve Request for Proposal.
Moss tokenizes carbon credits via the issuance of MCO2 Tokens, which increases
the security of carbon credit transactions and trackability by further programming into
blockchain an asset that is already digital, improving the composability of
carbon credits.

MCO2 Token represents one voluntary carbon credit and Moss has its ledger publicly available for any holder to check and audit at any time. MCO2 holders have legal ownership of the associated carbon credits. The legal ownership is registered via a standardized contract called a VERPA (Verified Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement). The carbon credits go through a rigorous, independent auditing process before they are issued by the offset registry (in this case, the Verified Carbon Standard) to ensure the carbon reductions are real and transparently verifiable.

For now - these tokens correspond to a basket of 6 carbon credit projects (listed below): 

[Madre de Dios](https://registry.verra.org/app/projectDetail/VCS/844)
[Amazon Rio REDD + IFM](https://registry.verra.org/app/projectDetail/VCS/1147)
[Agrocortex](https://registry.verra.org/app/projectDetail/VCS/1686)
[Ituxi](https://registry.verra.org/app/projectDetail/VCS/1654)
[Jari](https://registry.verra.org/app/projectDetail/VCS/1811)

MCO2 token on Celo can be traded on Ubeswap, the Ethereum alternative is currently traded on Uniswap, Mercado Bitcoin and ProBit Exchange. Via MCO2 token purchases, MOSS users have sent US$ 10 million in 8 months to Amazon forest conservation projects and thus helped to preserve 1MM hectares. 
The price of the token should represent the market price of carbon captured in the projects described above and therefore the correlation with other reserve assets should be relatively low. However evidence based on a historic evaluation of the token price behaviour would be not statistically significant as the token is only traded over a relatively short time horizon. 

Here is the public link for the Moss credit balance on [Verra](https://registry.verra.org/mymodule/rpt/myRpt.asp?r=205&idSubAccount=6612)

The Moss Whitepaper can be found [here](https://v.fastcdn.co/u/f3b4407f/54475626-0-Moss-white-paper-eng.pdf)

CERTIK audited the Moss smart contracts, the public report can be found [here](https://static.moss.earth/Audit_Report_CertiK.pdf)

Armanino is auditing the issuance of carbon credits on MCO2 token, along with its
Ledger, the public report can be found [here](https://moss.earth/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Moss.Earth-AUP-Report-2021-Final-External.pdf)

All carbon credits related to land-use projects, which are issued by the Verified Carbon Standard, require an extensive due-diligence process by the project developer, including ascertaining ownership over the carbon offsets through an agreement with the landowner.  All projects go through a third-party audit to measure exactly how much CO2 was reduced or removed.  In addition, we have selected projects that have gone through a voluntary, second certification.  This certification, through a body called the Climate, Community and Biodiversity Alliance (CCBA), ensures that the projects achieve additional development and environmental co-benefits -- above and beyond the typical carbon offset project.  Finally, Moss has presented to us a detailed description of the process of retiring carbon offsets on the VCS registry once sold to another party, a process that we can independently confirm because the VCS registry transaction/retirement information will be made available to us. This will help ensure there is no double-counting of carbon reductions.

## Proposed Changes
The current reserve targets the following allocation over time. The initial CELO amount allocated to the reserve may be diversified into other non-CELO crypto assets, the market fluctuates constantly and the reserve rebalances systematically, so the actual holdings will be off-target initially.
1. Set reserve targets to: 
CELO: 50%
BTC: 29.5%
ETH: 15%
DAI: 5%
cMCO2: 0.5%

```
[
  {
    "contract": "Reserve",
    "function": "setAssetAllocations",
    "args": [
      [
        "0x63474c4400000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
        "0x4254430000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
        "0x4554480000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
        "0x4441490000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
        "0x634d434f32000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000"
      ],
      [
        "500000000000000000000000",
        "295000000000000000000000",
        "150000000000000000000000",
        "50000000000000000000000",
        "5000000000000000000000"
      ]
    ],
    "value": "0"
  }
]
```

2. To initiate the nature backed assets portfolio purchase $500,000 worth of existing MC02 tokens. The purchase of the token will be done in an over the counter transaction, directly with the issuer. The support team is evaluating current possibilities to safely store the token. 

## Verification
- Confirm the proposal: `celocli governance:view --proposalID <proposalID>`
- After execution, confirm that AssetAllocationSymbols and AssetAllocationWeights in the Reserve contract were properly set:
https://explorer.celo.org/address/0x9380fA34Fd9e4Fd14c06305fd7B6199089eD4eb9/read-contract

## Risks
- Price risk: As the token is traded on exchanges the price of it is volatile. 
- Correlation between other assets of the reserve would lead to less diversification potential. 
- Custody of the token. 

## Useful Links
* [Celo Reserve Website](https://celoreserve.org/)
* [Stability WhitePaper](https://celo.org/papers/Celo_Stability_Analysis.pdf)
* [The Celo Reserve FAQs](https://medium.com/celoorg/the-celo-reserve-faqs-f3f7cbb1991f). 
* [The Celo Expansion & Contraction Mechanism](https://medium.com/celoorg/zooming-in-on-the-celo-expansion-contraction-mechanism-446ca7abe4f)
* [Moss credit balance on Verra](https://registry.verra.org/mymodule/rpt/myRpt.asp?r=205&idSubAccount=6612)
* [Moss WhitePaper](https://v.fastcdn.co/u/f3b4407f/54475626-0-Moss-white-paper-eng.pdf)
* [Moss Audit 1](https://static.moss.earth/Audit_Report_CertiK.pdf)
* [Moss Audit 2](https://moss.earth/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Moss.Earth-AUP-Report-2021-Final-External.pdf)
