# CGP [0031]: Granda Mento

- Date: 2020-06-15
- Author(s): @tkporter, @albertclabs
- Status: DRAFT
- Governance Proposal ID #: 31
- Date Executed: [if executed]

## Overview

In [CIP 38](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/blob/master/CIPs/cip-0038.md), Granda Mento is specified as a mechanism to facilitate large CELO <-> stable token (e.g. cXXX) exchanges that aren't suitable via Mento or OTC. In Contract Release 5, a new contract is created, `GrandaMento.sol`, that implements CIP 38's specification.

This proposal sets the initial parameters for and effectively activates Granda Mento to facilitate cUSD and cEUR exchanges.

## Proposed Changes

There are a number of configurable parameters in `GrandaMento.sol`:

1. **`address public approver;`** - Has the authority to approve exchanges.
  * This is proposed to be a 4 of 7 multisig of community volunteers that are active within the Celo ecosystem. The multisig has an address of `0x0....0` and has the following signers:

| **Name**        | **Affiliation**                       | **Discord Handle**        | **Address**                                  |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| Andrew Shen     | [Bi23 Labs](https://bi23.com/)        | `Shen \| Bi23 Labs #6675` | `0xBecc041a5090cD08AbD3940ab338d4CC94d2Ed3c` |
| Pinotio         | [Pinotio](https://pinotio.com/)       | `Pinotio.com #5357`       | `0x802FE32083fD341D8e9A35E3a351291d948a83E6` |
| Serge Kiema     | [DuniaPay](https://www.duniapay.net/) | `serge_duniapay #5152`    | `0xdcac99458a3c5957d8ae7b92e4bafc88a32b80e4` |
| Will Kraft      | Celo Governance Working Group         | `Will Kraft #2508`        | `0x169E992b3c4BE08c42582DAb1DCFb2549d9C23E1` |
| Zviad Metreveli | [WOTrust](https://wotrust.us/)        | `zm #1073`                | `0xE267D978037B89db06C6a5FcF82fAd8297E290ff` |
| human           | [OpenCelo](https://www.opencelo.org/) | `human #6811`             | `0x91f2437f5C8e7A3879e14a75a7C5b4CccC76023a` |
| Deepak Nuli     | [Kresko](https://www.kresko.fi/)      | `Deepak \| Kresko#3647`   | `0x099f3F5527671594351E30B48ca822cc90778a11` |

2. **`uint256 public vetoPeriodSeconds;`** - The minimum amount of time in seconds that must elapse between a proposed exchange being approved and when the exchange can be executed. Should give sufficient time for Governance to veto an approved exchange.
  * This is proposed to be 2 weeks (a value of `1209600` seconds). The current governance parameters involve a 1 day approval stage and 1 week referendum stage. Two weeks is chosen to allow ample time to create a veto proposal and gather community feedback, while also balancing needs from exchangers. This delay also serves as friction, imposing an opportunity cost by locking capital to prevent exchangers from using Granda Mento for a means of arbitrage or trivial intents.
3. **`FixidityLib.Fraction public spread;`** - The percent fee imposed upon an exchange execution.
  * Given the opportunity cost imposed upon exchangers when using Granda Mento, there is already a disincentive to use Granda Mento. Granda Mento requires sufficient friction while also being accessible compared to other stablecoin issuers at scale, such as USDC and USDT. USDT charges a [0.1% fee](https://tether.to/fees/); however they have much lower limits ($100k) and close to immediate redemption. USDC is [largely free](https://www.circle.com/en/pricing), with some fees associated with card and bank wire transactions, also with immediate redemption. Given this landscape of competing fees, the proposed spread is 0% (a value of `0`).
4. **`FixidityLib.Fraction public maxApprovalExchangeRateChange;`** - The maximum change of the CELO price quoted in the stable token between the time an exchange proposal is created and the time the exchange proposal is approved by the approver.
  * This is proposed to be 30% (a value of `300000000000000000000000`). The purpose of this parameter is to prevent a long-range attack where a proposal is intentionally created when the price of the sell asset is high, locking in the high price. Then, at a point when the price of the sell asset is lower, the proposer can bring the proposal to the community, hoping the community does not notice the high price. A value of 30% navigates ensuring a long-range attack like this is unlikely to occur while being high enough to likely not impede "legitimate" exchange proposal approvals.
5. **`mapping(string => ExchangeLimits) stableTokenExchangeLimits`** - Set by Governance via `setStableTokenExchangeLimits`. A mapping of the stable token registry ID string to a struct containing two `uint256`s, `minExchangeAmount` and `maxExchangeAmount`.
  * For cUSD, the proposed limits are:
    * Minimum exchange amount: 500,000 cUSD (a value of `500000000000000000000000`)
    * Maximum exchange amount: 50,000,000 cUSD (a value of `50000000000000000000000000`)
  * For cEUR, the proposed limits are:
    * Minimum exchange amount: 400,000 cEUR (a value of `400000000000000000000000`)
    * Maximum exchange amount: 40,000,000 cEUR (a value of `40000000000000000000000000`)

Parameters 1 through 3 can be set when `GrandaMento.sol` is initialized in contract release 5. This CGP will be updated once those initialization values are chosen, but for now the following transaction list includes setting each of the previously described parameters.

In addition, this proposal would set GrandaMento as an exchange spender of the Reserve, similar to the existing Exchange contracts for cUSD and cEUR. This is necessary for facilitating stable token -> CELO exchanges, which would purchase CELO from the reserve.

```
[
  {
    "contract": "GrandaMento",
    "function": "setApprover",
    "args": [
      "<approver multisig address - TBD>"
    ]
  },
  {
    "contract": "GrandaMento",
    "function": "setVetoPeriodSeconds",
    "args": [
      "1209600"
    ]
  },
  {
    "contract": "GrandaMento",
    "function": "setSpread",
    "args": [
      "0"
    ]
  },
  {
    "contract": "GrandaMento",
    "function": "setMaxApprovalExchangeRateChange",
    "args": [
      "300000000000000000000000"
    ]
  },
  {
    "contract": "GrandaMento",
    "function": "setStableTokenExchangeLimits",
    "args": [
      "StableToken",
      "500000000000000000000000",
      "50000000000000000000000000"
    ]
  },
  {
    "contract": "GrandaMento",
    "function": "setStableTokenExchangeLimits",
    "args": [
      "StableTokenEUR",
      "400000000000000000000000",
      "40000000000000000000000000"
    ]
  },
  {
    "contract": "Reserve",
    "function": "addExchangeSpender",
    "args": [
      "<GrandaMento address - TBD>"
    ]
  }
]
```

## Verification

TODO

## Risks

Implementation risks:
* The Granda Mento implementation is still pending audit in July and is still subject to change.
* Activating Granda Mento for the first time in a production environment.
* Setting parameters and effectively activating Granda Mento in the same proposal leaves no room for reaction if the parameters are incorrect. However, this proposal will be ran on testnets prior to mainnet.
* Security practices around the multisig and the signers.
* Viewing on-chain exchange proposals is not easily accessible by the community with a clear UI, leaving risk that exchanges could be approved without the community deciding whether or not to veto.

Economic risks:
* Enabling large volume exchanges of stable tokens -> CELO may result in a loss of stable token liquidity.
* Large volume exchanges of CELO -> stable token will lower the reserve ratio.

## Useful Links

* [CIP 38 - Granda Mento](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/blob/master/CIPs/cip-0038.md)
* [CIP 38 Discussions](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/issues/229)
* [Forum post on Granda Mento](https://forum.celo.org/t/discussion-on-granda-mento-enabling-larger-stablecoin-mints/966)
