# CGP [0034]: Celo Core Contracts Release 2

- Date: 2021-01-05
- Author(s): @nambrot
- Status: DRAFT
- Governance Proposal ID #: TBD
- Date Executed: TBD

## Overview

In this governance proposal, we propose execute the Celo Core Contracts Upgrade Release 2. This release follows the [release process](https://docs.celo.org/community/release-process/smart-contracts) as established by the release in CGP13. After the sizable initial release 1, release 2 is much lighter in scope and reflects the core developers' intention to ship smaller changes more frequently as opposed to fewer, but larger changes.

Changes that are being proposed in this release are described in [this Github release](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/releases/tag/celo-core-contracts-v2.pre-audit). OpenZeppelin is currently in the process of auditing release 2 and the audit report will be available prior to proposals on the public testnets and mainnet. Prominently, the verification tooling introducing in release 1 was part of the audit scope which should give Celo stakeholders additional confidence in the integrity of the release process itself.

## Proposed Changes

Please see the release notes to more details on the changes itself. The actual on-chain effects are as follows:

Core Contracts (as `setImplementation`)
- `Accounts`: `1.1.1.0` => `1.1.1.1`
- `Attestations`: `1.1.1.0` => `1.1.1.1`
- `AttestationsTest`: `1.1.1.0` => `1.1.1.1`
- `LockedGold`: `1.1.1.0` => `1.1.1.1`
- `Escrow`: `1.1.1.0` => `1.1.1.1`
- `SortedOracles`: `1.1.1.0` => `1.1.2.0`


## Verification

TBD

## Risks

Celo Core Contracts are critical for the functioning of the Celo Platform. This proposal touches contracts which impact Celo's Proof-of-Stake and consensus, the stability and identity protocol and Governance itself. While cLabs have invested significant efforts to expand testing and verification tooling, and a third party audit has been completed, errors in this proposal could lead to situations that are only recoverable with a very difficult hard fork.

## Useful Links

* [Celo Core Contracts Release Process](https://docs.celo.org/community/release-process/smart-contracts)
* [Github release](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/releases/tag/celo-contracts-v2.pre-audit)
* [Forum post about the upgrade](https://forum.celo.org/t/contracts-release-2/719)
