# CIP [0003]: Identity Claims and Metadata

- Date: 2019-09-19
- Author: @timmoreton
- Status: WIP

## Overview

This CIP describes a general mechanism that allows principals on the Celo platform to claim real-world identities and maintain rich, unverified metadata. Metadata may be public, or optionally, encrypted and accessible only to the Celo Foundation. Third parties can verify these identity claims, and use the associated unverified metadata as appropriate. 

There are a number of principals that provide resources to or deploy services on the Celo platform that may wish to assert identities or provide metadata. These include, but are not limited to:
* Validators
* Validator groups
* Smart contract owners
* DApp developers
* Creators of Governance proposals
* Oracles 

Use cases include:
* Tools want to present public metadata supplied by a validator or validator group as part of a list of candidate groups, or a list of current elected validators.
* Governance Explorer UIs may want to present public metadata about the creators of governance proposals
* The Celo Foundation receives notice of a security vulnerability and wants to contact elected validators to facilitate them to make a decision on applying a patch.
* A DApp makes a request to the Celo Wallet for account information or to sign a transaction. The Celo Wallet should provide information about the DApp to allow the user to make a decision whether to accept the transaction or not.   

## Goals

- Integrate with the existing Attestations structure, rather than maintain separate identifer fields in other contracts, so that the same identity claims and metadata can be linked from any of a principals' activities  
- Allow principals to make an extensible range of identity claims, and support clients verifying the veracity of these 
- Allow principals to supply unverified extensible, structured metadata off-chain
- Allow tools to choose what metadata they require and how they present it
- Support both public (unencrypted) metadata and metadata accessible only to the Celo Foundation

## Proposed Solution

### Claims

The Attestations contract is extended as follows:
*  Add a `struct Claim` that comprises: 
   * `service` - Required. Initially supported values for `service` include `primary`, `github`, and `twitter`.
   * `identifier` - Optional. The identifier being claimed on the service being claimed.  
   * `data` - Optional. Additional data, e.g. a 
   URL, to locate a linked signed reference to the claim. 
* A field array `Claim[] claims` is added to the `Account` struct. 

All claims are optional.

### Primary Claims and Public Metadata

For claims with `service` set to `primary`, `identifier` is a domain name. `data` is an optional path prefix, such that `https://<identifier>/<data>/identity.json` is a file in the following format:

```
{
  "address": "<address>",
  "claim": {
    "service": "primary",
    "identifier": "..",
    "ctime": 1231222312,
    "expiry" : 31536000, 
  },
  "signature": "<sig>",
}
```

TODO - detail exact format. 

Clients should verify the SSL/TLS certificate against a chain of trust and check it was issued for the domain and `identifier` value in question. 

Public metadata for a principal with a `primary` claim may be obtained by first verifying the claim then retrieving the resource at `<url>/<address>-metadata.json`.

Example structure of this file:

```
{
  "address" : "<address>",
  "unvalidated": {
    "name" : "My Name",
    "organization" : "My Org",
    "url" : ...,
    "profile_pic" : ...,
    "favicon" : ...,
  },
  "signature": ...,
}
```

TODO - detail exact format. 

### Changes to ContractKit

Add functionality to ContractKit to:

* obtain, verify and cache claims and metadata for an address.

* generate signed identity files ready to be uploaded.

### Changes to Validator elections

Remove the `identifier, name, and url` fields from the `Validator` and `ValidatorGroup` structs in `Validators.sol`, and associated functions.

### Later: Private Metadata

Metadata shared only with the Celo Foundation can be provided at `<url>/<address>-foundation.json.enc` by encrypting a JSON file with the public key of the Celo Foundation.

Example structure of this file:

```
{
  "address" : "<address>",
  "unvalidated": {
    "phone" : "+11231234567",
    "whatsapp" : "+11231234567",
    "email" : "security@example.com",
  },
  "signature": ...,
}
```

TODO confirm encryption method

### Later: claims for other services

For claims with `service` set to `github`, `identifier` is the Github handle, and `data` identifies the raw contents of a gist, such that `https://gist.githubusercontent.com/<identifier>/<data>` provides a file in the given format. Claim verifiers should take care to disallow relative path segments (e.g `/../`) in `data`. 

For claims with `service` set to `twitter`, `data` is the identifer of a tweet (such that it could be retrieved at `https://api.twitter.com/1.1/statuses/show.json?id=<id>`) whose body has the same format as above.

TODO - twitter requires an API key to retrieve tweets in json format. This is a centralization burden on claim verifiers.

## Alternative Solutions

## Risks

## Implementation

* To follow.
