# CIP 0005: Direct Announce

- Date: 2020-02-11
- Author: @kevjue (with a lot of feedback and ideas from @timmoreton, @m-chrzan, @tkporter)
- Status: WIP

## Overview

This proposal contains changes to Celo's announce protocol.  That protocol's main goal is to distribute each validator's enodeURL(s) to all the other validators, so that they can create direct TCP connections among each other (effectively create an overlay network among the validators).  This overlay network is then used by Celo's IBFT consensus algorithm to reach consensus on block proposals.

If a validator's enode URL(s) is widely known, it can become vulnerable to DoS attacks, which in the extreme can damage liveness. To mitigate this vulnerability, the enode URL(s) need to be encrypted with each target validators' public key when sent over the wire. Consequently, each validator will need to share data that is O(N<sup>2</sup>) size where N is the number of elected validators (Note that the validators will also share its enode URL(s) with the top 10 validators that are just below the election threshold cutoff.  Throughout this document, the phrase "elected validators" will include those 10).

## Goals

The goals for this CIP are the following:

1) Minimize bandwidth requirements for the network's full nodes.  Some of the potential full node operators need to use ISPs that have expensive networking rates.  It is important to ensure that adoption of the full nodes is as broad and diverse as possible, so that consumer end users will have good access to the blockchain via the mobile light client.
2) Maintain a healthy overlay network for IBFT.   This is to maximize consistent block times, which obviously has direct impact to the consumer end users.

This CIP is an iteration of the Announce protocol that is implemented in https://github.com/celo-org/celo-blockchain/pull/816.  The original protocol does optimize for 2), but not for 1).

- Reduce bandwidth requirements of the full nodes.
- Maximize availability of the IBFT overlay network.

## Proposed Solution

The announce protocol has to be able to deal with two fundamental faulty scenarios.  For a given validator pair, when only one of the validators has the correct enodeURL of the other (the asymmetric ignorance case) and when both of the validators don't have the correct enodeURL of the other (the mutual ignorance case).

To deal with these cases, this proposal proposes adding the following high level components to the existing Announce protocol.  1) Add the capability for a validator to directly communicate to another remote validator its assigned enodeURL, 2) add fast discovery of validator enode mapping changes, and 3) add capability for a validator to query another validator for its assigned enodeURL via a gossiped message.  Details of these components are in the subsections below.

The asymmetric ignorance case can then be handled by having the validators directly communicate to each remote validator its assigned enodeURL whenever the enodeURL mapping is updated.  Note that this will need to happen for all remote validators, even if the assigned URL is not updated for a subset of the validators, since all validators will need to know what is the updated version number.  Also, this direct communication will need to be handled when there is and is not an existing connection between validators.

The mutual ignorance case can be handled by having each validator monitor when a validator enode mapping changes, and when it realizes that its changed, it will gossip a query message to the validator for the updated assigned enodeURL.  That validator will then directly communicate it to the querying validator.

### Direct communication of assigned enodeURL

This component will include the following changes:

1)  Announce message format will need to be changed so that only one authenticated and encrypted enodeURL (along with the version number) can be put in the message payload
2)  On enodeURL mapping update, that validator will need to directly send an announce message to all validators. In the case of when the validator already has a connection with the remote validator, the originating validator should simply send an announce message to it.  In the case when that connection doesn't exist, then the announce message will need to be sent as part of the connection establishing handshake.  Note that if a validator is proxied, then that validator will send a signed version message to each proxy so that they will in term send it to other validators or proxied validators' proxies.

Issue https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/issues/2667 tracks this component.

### Fast discovery of changed enodeURL mapping

This component will require all full nodes and validators to store a copy of a table that will contain the latest enodeURL mapping version number for each elected validator.  Whenever a validator updates 
enodeURL mapping, it will need to gossip a message containing the updated version number, and all nodes should update their table.

Whenever a connection is established between two nodes, they will synchronize their tables so that both tables will have the latest version numbers.  This will handle the case of when a node just joins the P2P network and when a network partition has been repaired.  In those cases, the nodes throughout the network should quickly synchronize their tables.

Issue https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/issues/2668 tracks this component.

### EnodeURL query message

When a validator realizes that its assigned enodeURL for a remote validator has been updated, that validator should gossip a enodeURL query message destined to the remote validator.  Once the destined validator receives the message, it will send a direct announce message to the originating validator.

Note that the originating validator will need to continuously re-gossip out this message until it receives a direct announce message, since it will never know for sure if the destined validator got the message (e.g. a network may have become partitioned).  The period between regossips should initially be 5 minutes, and doubled after every subsequent regossip, and finally capped at 1 hour.

Issue https://github.com/celo-org/celo-blockchain/issues/863 tracks this component.

## Alternative Solutions

There were two variants to this proposals that were considered.

1) Not including the fast discovery of changed enodeURL mapping, and instead have validators send enodeURL query messages once they realize that they are not connected to an elected validator.  The proposal will not handle the case when a validator is down as elegantly.  In that case, all the other validators will continuously be gossiping query messages until it's back up, which could result in high bandwidth usage.

2) Persisting the enodeURL query gossip message for all full nodes/validators and have them be regossiped on peer connection.  This will reduce any need to regossip query messages and I think can be considered to be added later.  This does add significant complexity to the proposal above and probably handles a case that rarely happens.  If it happens more then expected, then this feature could be added.

## Risks

These protocol changes has a direct impact on consensus since the IBFT overlay network depends on this protocol.  Also, these announce protocol changes are not planned to be backward compatible, so all nodes will need to upgrade at the same time.

## Implementation

* To follow.
