# CIP [0006]: Implement ElectionVote, GovernanceUpvote and GovernanceVote functions in releasegold contract

- Date: 2020-05-03
- Author: @zviadm
- Status: DRAFT

## Overview

Currently beneficiaries of releasegold contracts can only vote if they create a 
separate vote signer address. While this is ok for people who run local nodes and are comfortable
with `celocli` usage overall, it creates extra barrier to usability for release gold owners that
may just want to use a hardware wallet and web UIs to interact and participate in CELO governance.

This limitation makes it much more complex to create web UIs that would allow people to easily
vote by just using their ledger wallets.

It is important to also mention that there is 100s of millions of gold in release gold
contracts right now, thus thus affects sizeable portion of CELO users.

## Goals

- Simplify voting (both for elections and for governance) for releasegold contract owners
- Simplify developing of web UIs that allow users to vote and participate in CELO without `celocli`

## Proposed Solution

Implementation should be quite simple, revokePending and revokeActive methods already exist in
releasegold contract. Need to add few new methods:
- electionVote - proxying election.Vote call
- governanceUpvote - proxying governance.Upvote call
- governanceVote - proxying governance.Vote call

## Alternative Solutions

Alternative is to keep things as they are and require webUI developers to implement complex
vote address signing flows throug their UI, so that user first creates and stores vote
signer address on their ledger, before it can be used for voting.

## Risks

- Risk should be quite low, since `onlyCanVote` modifier already exists in releasegold contract and should be sufficient to guarantee safety.
- Will require upgrading releasegold contract through governance, which might expose bugs in contract upgrades.

## Useful Links


## Implementation

