# CIP [0007]: Affordable Gas Downtime Slasher

- Date: 2020-05-05
- Author: @gastonponti (with a lot of feedback and ideas from @m-chrzan)
- Status: WIP

## Overview

This proposal includes improvements to Celo's downtime slashing, such that it can be evaluated within the block gas limit.

In order to promote a stable network, the Celo protocol includes slashing for downtime such that if a validator fails to participate in consensus for a given amount of time, they may be slashed. More information about slashing in the Celo protocol can be found on [docs.celo.org](https://docs.celo.org/celo-codebase/protocol/proof-of-stake/penalties)

Currently, slashable downtime is defined as a window of blocks, greater than a predefined length, in which no block's parent aggregated seal includes a signature from the validator in question. It's currently implementation checks and executes slashing in a single transaction which requires an amount of gas linear in the required window size.

Under its current implementation, the gas required to evaluate a downtime event may far exceed the block gas limit. In the Release Candidate 1 network, the downtime slashing window is configured to be 5760 blocks, which would require roughly 13.5 million gas to evaluate, while the block gas limit is set to 10 million.

## Goal

- Allow the user to slash a validator if it was down for a specific consecutive block window without running out of gas.

## Proposed Solution

Create a new contract funtion that divides the downtime verification in validation slots.

The user that wants to slash a particular validator will have to call a function from the contract `S_n` times (`S_n` * `slotSize` >= `slashableDowntime`, both parameters configured in the contract) to verify each slot.

Then the user must generate another contract call to verify that the validator to be slashed was down for every consecutive slot.

### Process

1) The user calls the contract to know the size of the Slot (`slotSize`) and the size of the interval to be covered by those Slots (`slashableDowntime`)

2) The user requires to validate `S_n` slots. Calls the contract function for the slot validation `[StartBlockNumber + (i * slotSize), StartBlockNumber + ((1 + i) * slotSize) )` with `0 <= i < S_n`

    *Function to be called in every Slot Check:*

        /**
         * @notice Test if a validator has been down for an specific chain of slots. This required to
         * have all the slot that cover the slashableDowntime previously calculated.
         * The startBlock has to be the first block of a Slot_1, if the slot is valid, will get the  
         * Slot that STARTS at "lastBlockOf(Slot_1) + 1" and then will repeat the same process
         * until it covers the slashableDowntime.
         * If the "lastBlockOf(Slot_n) + 1" falls in the middle of a Slot, that Slot won't be
         * take in count.
         * @param startBlock First block of a calculated downtime Slot.
         * Last block will be computed from this.
         * @param startSignerIndex Index of the signer within the validator set as of the start block.
         * @param endSignerIndex Index of the signer within the validator set as of the end block.
         * @return True if the validator signature does not appear in any block within the window.
         */
        function isDownForSlot(uint256 startBlock, uint256 startSignerIndex, uint256 endSignerIndex) public returns (bool)

3) The user calls the slash method with the `StartBlockNumber` (internally will verify that every slot validation was performed and succeded)
        
    *Function to be called to perform the Slash:*

        /**
          * @notice Requires that `isDown` returns true and that the account corresponding to
          * `signer` has not already been slashed for downtime for the a previous interval of
          * blocks that includes at least one block of the new downtime interval.
          * If so, fetches the `account` associated with `signer` and the group that
          * `signer` was a member of during the corresponding epoch.
          * Then, calls `LockedGold.slash` on both the validator and group accounts.
          * Calls `Validators.removeSlashedMember` to remove the validator from its
          * current group if it is a member of one.
          * Finally, stores that (account, epochNumber) has been slashed.
          * @param startBlock First block of the downtime.
          * @param startSignerIndex Validator index at the first block.
          * @param endSignerIndex Validator index at the last block.
          * @param groupMembershipHistoryIndex Group membership index from where
          * the group should be found. (For start block)
          * @param validatorElectionLessers Lesser pointers for validator slashing.
          * @param validatorElectionGreaters Greater pointers for validator slashing.
          * @param validatorElectionIndices Vote indices for validator slashing.
          * @param groupElectionLessers Lesser pointers for group slashing.
          * @param groupElectionGreaters Greater pointers for group slashing.
          * @param groupElectionIndices Vote indices for group slashing.
          */
        function slash(uint256 startBlock, uint256 startSignerIndex, uint256 endSignerIndex, uint256 groupMembershipHistoryIndex, address[] memory validatorElectionLessers, address[] memory validatorElectionGreaters, uint256[] memory validatorElectionIndices, address[] memory groupElectionLessers, address[] memory groupElectionGreaters, uint256[] memory groupElectionIndices) public

#### Note

This process allows the user to validate a Slot that will contain the data of every validator. This means that if for example, three validators where down in the same period, the same slots could be used to slash the three of them.
The gas required to generate the `S_n` slots will be spent only in the first validation.

### Variation of the proposed solution

- The slots validated could work for every user in the community. When a slashing is performed, every user that generated a validated slot that is used to demostrate the downtime, receives a portion of the reward. But for this some other changes are required in other contracts 

## Alternative Solutions

### Validator's 12-block window Uptime in the epoch

The Celo blockchain for reward purposes, calculates an uptime for each validator. The validator’s uptime for the epoch is the proportion of blocks in the epoch for which it is ‘up’: U = counter / (epoch_size - 11).

The uptime calculation uses a 12-block sliding window, so this means that the number won't represent the actual percentage of uptime for the validator. It's the percentage of 12-block windows that were considered up.

One possible approach, is to slash the validators if they do not meet a certain threshold for uptime in an epoch.

#### Pros

The uptime calculation it's part of the Celo protocol. This not only allow us to save gas from calculating a possible slashing, but also could let the same blockchain to perform the slashes. This would make a safer net, instead of requiring a so rigurous control of the users.

In the actual scenario, if no user is controling, no one get slashed.

#### Cons

This number doesn't represent an actual uptime. It's the percentage of 12-block windows that were considered up.

The validator's uptime is calculated at the end of the epoch, that has two potential problems:

- The slashing for an specific validator will be performed in the next epoch. That allows a validator that is not performing well in the epoch X, to be reelected for the epoch X+1, because the tool used for that (the uptime) was added after the election was completed.

- The uptime is a relation that has meaning tied to an specific epoch as whole. It won't give you a detail information of what happened.

For example, if the community sets the lower threshold as 50% this two scenarios have the same uptime:
 * A Validator is down for 1/2 epoch consecutive, and then signs every block for the next 1/2 epoch
 * A Validator signs 1 every 23 non-signed blocks (that will generate the output of 12 windows up, and 12 windows down). Which will give a 50% 12-block windows up, but the actual uptime was 1/24.

Another problem is the calculation between epoch for reelected validators.
Using the same threshold of the other example, if the validator has in the epoch X = 75% uptime, and in the epoch X+1 = 70% uptime, this two numbers could hide a more that a 1/2 epoch consecutive blocks downtime. This will happen if the 25% of the downtime in the X is at the ending of the epoch, and the other 30% of the downtime for the epoch X+1 is at the beginning. 

### Challenge the validator

This solutions consist in solving a challenge between a user and the validator. 

The user could claim that the validator has been down for an specific period of blocks. In which case, the validator has an specific amount of time to bring a proove where the blockchain could verify that the validator was up. For example 1 or N blocks that where signed by the validator.

#### Cons

- Will require that each validator controls and follows the challenges that it has open against.

- The chain could have a flood of challenges every epoch. To avoid indiscriminated challenges we could require from the user to place a bid, that the validator could win if it prooves its inocence. This way we could avoid non-checked downtime challenges, and the validator could have a good incentive to adopt this alternative solution.

### Why were discarded the other solutions?

The objective of this CIP is to fix a tool that today doesn't work properly. Changing the way to calculate in which situations could a validator get slashed, requires a deeper discussion that don't have to be rushed.

If we change the rules, with a tool broken, we are basically forcing a result, and it's not the purporse of this CIP.
The author highly recommend to take in count these other ways of slashing for the future, without the rush that need brings.

These other tools could be complementary to the actual (and working properly) one. Cover the different aspects of what we believe is a validator working as it should, it's the key to setting the standards of excellence that we seek.


## Useful Links

* [Epoch uptime information](https://docs.celo.org/celo-codebase/protocol/proof-of-stake/epoch-rewards/validator-rewards)
* Links to related CIPs or other documents

## Implementation

* WIP PR: https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/pull/3806
