# CIP [0009]: Standalone signing service for Validators

- Date: 2020-05-14
- Author: @asaj
- Status: WIP

## Overview

Validator operational excellence is vital to the security and performance of the Celo network.

However, validators currently face significant operational limitations due to key management being bundled into `celo-blockchain`.

In particular, it makes it cumbersome to switch which node is used to participate in consensus.

Switching nodes allows validators to upgrade to newer versions of `celo-blockchain` or to failover to a different node if the primary node fails.

Validators who wish to switch nodes currently have the following options:

1. Bring down node A, bring up node B with key material copied from node A.
2. Bring up node B with key material copied from node A, bring down node B.
3. Bring up node B with new key material, authorize the new key, and bring down node A after the next election.

Option `1` results in downtime, option `2` risks double signing, and option `3` can only be done once every 24 hours.
Furthermore, options `1` and `2` may require unsafe key management practices, which may result in keys being compromised.

Decoupling key management from other validator functionality will allow validators to switch nodes with zero downtime and no risk of double signing.

## Goals

- Zero downtime validator upgrades within an epoch
- Failover possible with no risk of double signing

## Proposed Solution

The proposed solution is to use `clef`, introduced in [go-ethereum v1.9](https://blog.ethereum.org/2019/07/10/geth-v1-9-0/), as a standalone signer for validators.

`clef` is integrated into `celo-blockchain` as an implementation of the [wallet](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-blockchain/blob/3caca596d1ff23a9faf5339f108c993f38bfa743/accounts/accounts.go#L50) interface in [accounts/external/backend.go](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-blockchain/blob/master/accounts/external/backend.go).

Validators will run a `clef` instance that manages their [validator signer key](https://docs.celo.org/validator-guide/summary/detailed#authorized-validator-signers), and point their node to that instance.

To switch nodes, validators will issue a command to `clef` to stop accepting RPCs from node A and start accepting RPCs from node B.

### Implementation

#### Wallet interface
The current `clef` implementation of the `wallet` interface is missing the following functions needed to support running a validator:
- Decrypt
- SignHashBLS
- SignMessageBLS
- GenerateProofOfPossession
- GenerateProofOfPossessionBLS
- GetPublicKey

To implement these functions, new RPCs will need to be added to `clef`.

#### Node mutex
More investigation will need to be done to figure out exactly how to atomically switch nodes.

Some options:

- Implement a `clef` RPC to switch the value of the `--rpcaddr` flag.
- Have `clef` accept RPCs from both nodes, and use `miner.start` and `miner.stop` on the node (or similar RPCs that allow these operations to be scheduled)

#### Threshold signatures
Using threshold signatures for block finalization is an approach taken by [Polychain Labs' Cosmos validator](https://blog.polychainlabs.com/tendermint/2020/03/26/threshold-validator-for-tendermint.html) to improve security and availability.

Celo is a natural candidate to adopt a similar feature for BLS block finalization signatures and ECDSA consensus message signatures.

A standalone signing service would simplify the implementation of this feature.

Validators could run `N` instances of `clef`, and one or more instances of `celo-blockchain`.

The `celo-blockchain` nodes could be configured to ping each of the `clef` instances for a signature share, and return once `M` have been collected.

The `M/N` threshold signature would protect against `N-M` `clef` instances being unavailable or compromised.

Multiple `celo-blockchain` nodes with a failover mechanism would protect against a single node being unavailable.

## Risks

- The new node will not have the same consensus DB, which introduces a small risk of double signing. One option to mitigate this is for `clef` to stop accepting RPCs from node A and wait a block before accepting RPs from node B.
- Upgrades to `clef` may still require key rotations. This could be mitigated by threshold signatures; so long as `M > N/2` individual `clef` instances could be upgraded one at a time with zero downtime.

## Implementation

* To follow.
