# CIP 0012: More granular validator signer keys

- Date: 2020-05-20
- Author: @kobigurk
- Status: WIP

## Overview

Validator signer keys allow to both sign consensus blocks and rotate BLS keys. We suggest to add more granularity to support the following use case: ECDSA signing of consensus messages without the ability to rotate BLS keys. This would be useful for situations where the BLS key is well protected while the ECDSA key isn't. Since the BLS key signs the COMMIT messages, the danger rests mostly there anyway. 

Examples of these kinds of situations are threshold signatures for BLS and Ledger signing for BLS. BLS threshold signatures are much simpler than ECDSA threshold signatures and deploying only BLS would reduce complexity and attack surface. Ledger signing only for the BLS signatures makes sense since that's the only slashable offense, and moving all the ECDSA signatures to Ledger will unnecessarily slow consensus down (might still be within 5 sec block time, but not worth risking it).


## Goals

* Support secure usage scenarios of BLS keys without introducing more complexity to the system.

## Proposed Solution

We suggest the direct solution of introducing a *validator consensus key*. This key is only able to participate in consensus but not rotate BLS keys. The change requires adding a new role of *consensus signer* under the account, which is by default set to be the same as the validator signer. The validators contract will use the consensus signer instead of the validator signer.

This still leaves the flexibility of the validator signer being able to rotate the BLS keys and makes consensus signers be used for a single purpose - consensus signing.

## Alternative Solutions

Maybe we can tie into CIP10, where namespaces are defined and use that instead. It's a more long-term solution, with the caveat complex and would require changes to core smart contracts to disable rotation in any case.

## Risks

* We still leave the ECDSA consensus signing keys exposed. We should evaluate more deeply if there's a significant risk here.
* Requires upgrading the Accounts smart contract.

## Useful Links

* [CIP10 PR](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/pull/17/files)

## Implementation

* To follow.
