# CIP 0013: Change BLS hash-to-group (non-SNARK)

- Date: 2020-05-24
- Author: @kobigurk
- Status: WIP

## Overview

Generating BLS signatures in Celo requires first hashing message into the G\_1 group of BLS12-377. It has a base field F\_q. 

The current hash to group works roughly as follows:

1. Initialize a counter to 0.
2. Hash (counter || message) with Blake2Xs to get 512 bits.
3. Take 377 bits and attempt to parse them as an F\_q element. If failed, increment the counter and go to step 2.
4. Check if this field element is a valid x coordinate by performing an appropriate square root according to the curve equation. If failed, increment the counter and go to step 2. 
5. Use another bit to determine which of the matching y coordinates to take.
6. Multiply the parsed point by the cofactor. If the resulting point is the identity, increment the counter and go to step 2.
7. Return the resulting point as the hash to group.

This algorithm works well and is very SNARK-efficient - to verify a signature signed by a super-majority, a prover provides the counter as an auxiliary variable. In recent months, the Ethereum community has decided to implement [EIP-2537](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/2537), which introduces BLS12-381 precompiles. These precompiles include a hash to curve that follows the [evolving IETF spec](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-irtf-cfrg-hash-to-curve/). It's expected that once the IETF spec finalized, both Eth1, Eth2 and the precompiles will implement that. The precompile defined how to map a field element to both G\_1 and G\_2.

Additionally, both the EVM and Ledger devices currently support only Blake2b operations.

Lastly, the current hash-to-curve is not constant time. While it is not important for security in our case, since message our public, it's often more desirable to have a constant-time implementation to prevent implementation mistakes and attacks (e.g., DoS). We believe that moving to a constant time hashing will not affect the SNARK implementation severly enough.

## Goals

* Enable easier Eth1 EVM interoperability without introducing more types of hash-to-group, just new BLS12-377 precompiles with a port of the existing hash-to-group.
* Enable Ledger implementation of the hash-to-curve (e.g., for high watermark) without having to introduce new hashes into the core Ledger libraries.

## Proposed Solution

We propose the following:

* Follow the IETF spec for the mapping of a field element to a group element, which is expected to be finalized soon, rather than the try-and-increment method we currently use.
* Use Blake2b for hashing instead of Blake2Xs.
* Use a deterministic method for deriving field elements rather than try-and-increment, at the cost of a neglibile security reduction - parse a 511-bit element modulo q as the x coordinate and use the last bit to determine the y coordinate.

## Alternative Solutions

Introduce Blake2s into Ethereum and Ledger and implement try-and-increment logic in the Ledger.

## Risks

* This requires a network upgrade - all the nodes in the network will have to upgrade to use the updated header. Alternatively, we could have validators sign both using the old method and the new one and include both in the header to make a gradual move.

## Useful Links

* [EIP-2537](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/2537).
* [IETF spec](https://www.ietf.org/id/draft-irtf-cfrg-hash-to-curve-07.txt).

## Implementation

* To follow.
