# CIP [0015]: Hot standby for validators

- Date: 2020-06-10
- Author: @githubhandle
- Status: WIP

## Overview

Overall network health for the Celo blockchain depends on validators having minimal downtime.  Also, it's to the best interest 
to validators to mininize that downtime to prevent ever getting slashed.

When a new Celo blockchain client is released, validator operators may then choose to (and sometimes are required to) upgrade 
their validator.  Currently, that requires the validator operator to shut down their existing validator, install the new one, 
and then start it.

This obviously will result in some downtime for that validator.

## Goals

- Provide a way for validator operators to have no downtime when upgrading their validator binary.

## Proposed Solution

Each validator will provide that added ability to be configured to be a "primary" for a block period.  What "primary" means is 
that it will send out consensus messages and announce messages.  Non-primary validators will not send out any of those messages,
but it will process all incoming consensus messages and announce messages (as well as the regular blockchain sync related 
messages).

This proposal, and all the below alternative soluttions,  will also require that proxies are modified to support connection 
to multiple proxied validators.  The proxies will then forward any received consensus message and announce related messages 
to all of it's proxied validators.

## Alternative Solutions

### Proxy determines who is primary

The proxies could be configured to specify the primary block period.  They would then only forward consensus or announce messages
to the rest of the network from the primary.

### Signing node determins who is primary

The signing node (see CIP-9) would be modified so that it can accept the the primary block period configuration.  It would 
then only service sign requests from the validator who is designated as the primary per the block period configuration.

## Risks

Highlight any risks and concerns that may affect consensus, proof-of-stake, governance, protocol economics, the stability protocol, security, and privacy.

## Useful Links

* Optional section
* Links to related CIPs or other documents

## Implementation

* To follow.
* Or a link to a PR.

Add any implementation considerations here. For all proposals going through the governance process, this section should reference the code implementing the proposed change. It’s recommended to get community feedback before writing any code.
