# CIP [0000]: Title for Improvement

- Date: 2020-07-27
- Author: @yorhodes
- Status: WIP

## Overview

Create a standard QR scheme for encoding interacting with the Celo protocol for various consumers including SDKs, mobile wallets, and end users.
Various QR schemes are used across implementations like Valora and ContractKit.
Facilitate development of QR systems by standardizing usage and unifying scheme for interoperability.

## Goals

- adapt [ERC 67](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/67), [EIP 681](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-681.md0), and [EIP 831](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-831.md) to the celo protocol
- establish URI standard compatible with mobile app intents that optimizes for memory and performance
- enable simple construction of QRs by code from arbitrary celo transactions
- enable simple construction of QRs by humans with celo protocol understanding

## Proposed Solution

### Syntax
Payment request URLs contain "ethereum" in their schema (protocol) part and are constructed as follows:

    request                 = erc831_part target_address [ "@" chain_id ] [ "/" function_name ] [ "?" parameters ]
    erc831_part             = schema and optional prefix as defined in #831 - typically "ethereum" ":" [ "pay-" ] in this case
    target_address          = ethereum_address
    chain_id                = 1*DIGIT
    function_name           = STRING
    ethereum_address        = ( "0x" 40*40HEXDIG ) / ENS_NAME
    parameters              = parameter *( "&" parameter )
    parameter               = key "=" value
    key                     = "value" / "gas" / "gasLimit" / "gasPrice" / TYPE
    value                   = number / ethereum_address / STRING
    number                  = [ "-" / "+" ] *DIGIT [ "." 1*DIGIT ] [ ( "e" / "E" ) [ 1*DIGIT ] [ "+" UNIT ]


Where `TYPE` is a standard ABI type name, as defined in [Ethereum Contract ABI specification](https://solidity.readthedocs.io/en/develop/abi-spec.html). `STRING` is a URL-encoded unicode string of arbitrary length, where delimiters and the
percentage symbol (`%`) are mandatorily hex-encoded with a `%` prefix.

`UNIT` is a URL-encoded unicode string. If `UNIT` is ETH, it always means a multiplier of 10<sup>18</sup>. If it is something
else AND the addressed contract has a `symbol` field exactly matching this string AND the contract has a `decimals` field, then
10 to that power is used as a multiplier. Otherwise, the payment request is deemed invalid. Applications that have no access to
the blockchain should refuse accepting requests with a non-empty `UNIT`, if it is not ETH.

Note that a `number` can be expressed in *scientific notation*, with a multiplier of a power of 10. The use of this notation is strongly encouraged when expressing monetary value in Ethers or ERC #20 tokens in atomic units (e. g. Wei, in case of Ether).

If *key* in the parameter list is `value`, `gasLimit`, `gasPrice` or `gas` then *value* MUST be a `number`. Otherwise, it must correspond to the `TYPE` string used as *key*.

For the syntax of ENS_NAME, please consult ERC #137 defining Ethereum Name Service.

### Semantics

`target_address` is mandatory and denotes either the beneficiary of native token payment (see below) or the contract address with which the user is asked to interact.

`chain_id` is optional and contains the decimal chain ID, such that transactions on various test- and private networks can be requested. If no `chain_id` is present, the client's current network setting remains effective.

If `function_name` is missing, then the URL is requesting payment in the native token of the blockchain, which is Ether in our case. The amount is specified in `value` parameter, in the atomic unit (i.e. Wei). The use of scientific notation is strongly encouraged. For example, requesting 2.014 ETH to address `0xfb6916095ca1df60bb79Ce92ce3ea74c37c5d359` would look as follows:
[ethereum:0xfb6916095ca1df60bb79Ce92ce3ea74c37c5d359?value=2.014e18](ethereum:0xfb6916095ca1df60bb79Ce92ce3ea74c37c5d359?value=2.014e18)

Requesting payments in ERC #20 tokens involves a request to call the `transfer` function of the token contract with an `address` and a `uint256` typed parameter, containing the *beneficiary address* and the *amount in atomic units*, respectively. For example,
requesting a Unicorn to address `0x8e23ee67d1332ad560396262c48ffbb01f93d052` looks as follows:
[ethereum:0x89205a3a3b2a69de6dbf7f01ed13b2108b2c43e7/transfer?address=0x8e23ee67d1332ad560396262c48ffbb01f93d052&uint256=1](ethereum:0x89205a3a3b2a69de6dbf7f01ed13b2108b2c43e7/transfer?address=0x8e23ee67d1332ad560396262c48ffbb01f93d052&uint256=1)

If using ENS names instead of hexadecimal addresses, the resolution is up to the payer, at any time between receiving the URL and sending the transaction. Hexadecimal addresses always take precedence over ENS names, i. e. even if there exists a matching ENS name consisting of 40 hexadecimal digits, it should never be resolved. Instead, the hexadecimal address should be used directly.

If the payer client has access to the blockchain, the interface should display the amount in the units as specified in the token contract. Otherwise, it should be displayed as expressed in the URL.

Note that the indicated amount is only a suggestion (as are all the supplied arguments) which the user is free to change. With no indicated amount, the user should be prompted to enter the amount to be paid.

Similarly `gasLimit` and `gasPrice` are suggested user-editable values for *gas limit* and *gas price*, respectively, for the requested transaction. It is acceptable to abbreviate `gasLimit` as `gas`, the two are treated synonymously.

## Rationale
The proposed format is chosen to resemble `bitcoin:` URLs as closely as possible, as both users and application programmers are already familiar with that format. In particular, this motivated the omission of the unit, which is often used in Ethereum ecosystem. Handling different orders of magnitude is delegated to the application, just like in the case of `bitcoin:`, but lacking access to the block chain, the application can take a hint from the exponent in the URL. Additional parameters may be added, if popular use cases requiring them emerge in practice.

## Alternative Solutions

Other solutions you considered, and how they relate to the solution above.

## Risks

Highlight any risks and concerns that may affect consensus, proof-of-stake, governance, protocol economics, the stability protocol, security, and privacy.

## Useful Links

* Optional section
* Links to related CIPs or other documents

## Implementation

* To follow.
* Or a link to a PR.

Add any implementation considerations here. For all proposals going through the governance process, this section should reference the code implementing the proposed change. It’s recommended to get community feedback before writing any code.
