---
cip: 21
title: Governable lookback window
author: Andres di Govanni (@andres-dg)
discussions-to: <to be assigned>
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Ring 0
created: 2020-09-25
license: Apache 2.0
---

## Simple Summary

Validators are paid with rewards to maintain the network. Their pay rate is lowered if they were considered to be down for a fixed duration, called lookback window. This proposal suggests moving the lookback window on chain, to be adjusted by the community via governance proposals.

## Abstract

Each epoch, the Celo protocol elects validators trusted to sign mined blocks and, in return, they recieve Celo gold at the end of the epoch. What happens if an elected validator fails to sign the blocks it's been assigned? During an epoch, the Celo protocol will keep track of each validator's score, as a percentage, and the rewards paid will be proportional to their score.

The purpose of this score is to make sure the validator is doing the work it's been assigned. A validator's score can be penalized for various reasons. This proposal is focused on the uptime metric.

A validator's uptime is measured by keeping track of the blocks it signs. If a determined amount of consecutive blocks haven't been signed, the validator is considered to be down. This fixed amount of blocks is called the lookback window and it's value is 12 blocks and, given a block is mined every 5 seconds, that's a 1 minute window. The value currently lies in the chain config, meaning that changing the value would imply rebooting the node with an updated chain config.

## Motivation

The core devs have been recieving complaints from the validators saying this window is too small for even a simple node maintenance. To solve this, the window will have to be dynamically adjusted by the community, in other words, governable. This will let anyone with stake decide on the value of this parameter.

## Goals

- The lookback window parameter must be adjustable.
- The community must decide on the value.

## Specification

The proposed solution is to migrate the parameter to the EVM state (layer 2).

```solidity
  uint256 public uptimeLookbackWindow;
  event UptimeLookbackWindowSet(uint256 window);
```

This way, the parameter will be handled by the BlockchainParameters contract and it will be fetched with a static view call from the node (layer 1). This would mean a hard fork, replacing any reference to the parameter with a contract call.

This solution would also imply a contract update.

## Backwards Compatibility

The proposed solution will be used only after the Churrito Hard Fork is active, defaulting to the original value of 12 if not active.

## Security Considerations

The lookback window is queried for each block processed, so this would add a contract call for each block. It might be quite expensive but it is a view call.

The lookback window must have built in boundaries to limit the window from being excessively long (meaning validators could be down for a long time without hurting their score) or too small. The proposed limits are [12 (1 minute) - 720 (1 hour)]. These are not suggestions for the window, but simply proposed limits to avoid the community from setting this to a value that could potentially harm the community.

## Useful Links

- [Similar work for block gas limit](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/pull/1245/files)

## Implementation

- [Monorepo](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/pull/4747)
- [Blockchain](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-blockchain/pull/1136)
