# CIP 1: Validator-run attestation service

- Date: 2019-08-19
- Author: @nambrot

### Overview

The [lightweight identity protocol](https://docs.celo.org/celo-codebase/protocol/identity) allows users to map (the hash of) their phone numbers to account addresses, greatly improving the user experience of sending value on the Celo platform.

To do so in a decentralized manner, we rely on validators running what we currently call a verification pool to observe attestation requests and fullfill them by sending them via a text message provider like Twilio. However, the service we created expects celo-blockchain to do the decryption and attestation message signing which may not be ideal. Further, the verification pool should be agnostic to the infrastructure it is run on, whereas now it is tightly coupled to Google Cloud Platform products Firebase Cloud Function and Firebase Database.

This CIP outlines work to get the identity protocol to a more realistic production setting to possibly test on a Games of stakes betanet.

### Goals

- Get closer to a realistic production setting
- Make the validator experience of providing attestations as smooth as possible
- Make the verification process reliable and performant

### Proposed Solution

We propose the creation of a service called the attestation service. Its features would be as follows:

**Accept Reveals via HTTPS**
We currently have a reveal transaction whose sole purpose it is to encrypt an phone number (identifier) to the validator. That is unncessary to do on-chain. While this technically opens up the protocol to DDos attacks, we think the trade-off is worth it, as it will remove one of three transactions in the whole process, thus speed it up, and reduce gas costs. Validators need to register their service endpoint on the Attestations Contract

**Specify a separate encryption key**
We currently use the consensus key of a validator to both decrypt the phone number and sign the attestation message. Consensus carries much more weight than Attestations, so we should separate the keys to reflect that. We would need slight modifications to the Attestations contract to support the signing with the encryption key as set by the validator in the contract.

**Generic infrastructure setup**
We should write this service in a way that lends itself to many different hosting setups, reflecting the diversity of our validators and their setups.


### Alternative Solutions

An alternative could be to just not do anything right now, however we would not get the benefit of testing validator setups with the identity protocol in mind.

### Open Questions

N/A

### Future Work

Future work that we will definitely want to do is to not be completely dependent on Twilio. Thus we should modularize Text Message providers and allow Validators to easily spread text messages across providers.

### Proposed timeline

We ideally execute this CIP before any game-theoretical test.
