---
cip: 40
title: Extension to ODIS for Password Hashing
author: Victor Graf <victor@clabs.co>, Cody Born <cody@clabs.co>, Alec Schaefer <alec@clabs.co>
discussions-to: https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/issues/233
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: 3
created: 2021-06-15
requires: TODO - Add cryptography CIP when ready
license: Apache 2.0
---

### Terminology

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in [RFC 2119](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119.html).

## Simple Summary

An extension to the ODIS phone number privacy service to support granular rate limiting with the
goal of hardening passwords for use as encryption and authorization keys, as well as other future
use cases.

## Abstract

<!-- TODO(victor): Once we have a roughly agreed upon proposal for the pOPRF, link it here -->
Given the required cryptographic functionality (to be discussed in more detail in a future
proposal), this proposal describes an interface to be exposed by the ODIS service allowing the user
to specify a domain string (i.e. a salt value) with rate-limiting rules to be combined with their
blinded input (e.g.  phone number or password).

Central to the proposed interface are domains. A domain is a struct which specifies rate limiting
information and uniquely identifies the context of the secret to be hashed. As an example, a domain
for hashing an account password might specify an application username of "vitalik.eth" (context) and
a cap of 10 password attempts (rate-limiting parameter). These would be combined with the user's
password (blinded input) in a one-way function to form the final output.

Queries with distinct domain specifiers will receive uncorrelated output. For example, output from
ODIS with the phone number domain and message `18002738255` will be distinct from and
unrelated to the output when requesting with a password domain and message `18002738255`.

Additionally, domain specifiers will control what rate limiting rules are applied. For example, the
phone number domain could use the current ODIS rate limiting rules, while the password domain may
use much stricter rules, with parameters that can be tuned by the user or application developer.
Combined with the fact that distinct domains produce uncorrelated output, this allows for the
domains to be used as distinct OPRFs with tunable rate limiting rules.

In order to make this scheme flexible, allowing for user-defined tuning of rate-limits and the
introduction of new rate limiting and authorization rules in the future, domains are defined as
serializeable structs. New domain types, with associated rate-limiting rules, may be added in the
future to meet the needs of new applications.

## Motivation

Effective [offline password cracking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Password_cracking) techniques
limit the use of passwords to derive encryption or authentication keys. Rate-limited hashing can be
used to make it much more difficult to crack a password. Computationally expensive password hashing
functions, such as `PBKDF` and `scrypt`, are commonly used for this purpose, but provide [limited
protection](https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.05023) and are expensive to run on end-user devices. ODIS,
the phone number privacy service on Celo, implements rate-limited hashing to protect users' phone
numbers from being extracted from their on-chain identifiers. With some extensions, ODIS can
additionally be used to provide rate-limited hashing for passwords, as well as many more use cases.

[Phone Number Privacy](https://docs.celo.org/celo-codebase/protocol/identity/phone-number-privacy)

ODIS' rate-limited hash function is implemented from an
[oblivious](http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~tal/4261/F19/hugo-columbia-oprf.pdf) [pseudorandom
function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudorandom_function_family) (OPRF). In effect, this allows
the service to rate-limit invocations of the logical hash function without every seeing the users'
input (e.g. phone number or password). Unfortunately, it only allows for a single rate limiting
scheme.

In order to support secure password hashing, granular rate limits are invaluable. In order to apply
rate limits on a per-context basis (e.g. restricting the number of guesses on a user's password to a
constant number) ODIS' OPRF scheme must be extended to allow the inclusion of a domain specifier
that is visible to the service.

## Specification

In order to support granular rate-limited hash functionality, ODIS will need to support a new
interface which accepts a domain specifier, visible to the service, alongside the blinded input.

### Service APIs

#### Existing blinded requests

ODIS currently makes available its OPRF function with the following API:

```typescript
// POST /getBlindedMessagePartialSig
// Headers:
//   Content-Type: application/json
//   Authorization: ${signature from authorized signer (e.g. DEK) for account}
interface GetBlindedMessageSigRequest {
  // Celo account address. Query is charge against this account's quota.
  account: string
  // Query message. A blinded elliptic curve point encoded in base64.
  blindedQueryPhoneNumber: string
  // Optional on-chain identifier. Unlocks additional quota if the
  // account is verified as an owner of the identifier.
  hashedPhoneNumber?: string
  // [Deprecated] Client-specified request timestamp, in milliseconds.
  // Used for request expiration.
  timestamp?: number
  // Client-specified session ID.
  sessionID?: string
}

interface SignMessageResponse {
  success: boolean
  error?: string
  version?: string
  signature?: string
  performedQueryCount?: number
  totalQuota?: number
  blockNumber?: number
}
```

[celo-org/celo-monorepo](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/tree/master/packages/phone-number-privacy/signer)

#### Extension for domain-restricted requests

In order to support domain-restricted queries, a new API is proposed:

```typescript
// POST /domain/sign
// Headers:
//   Content-Type: application/json
interface DomainRestrictedSignatureRequest {
  // Domain specification.
  // Selects the PRF domain and rate limiting rules.
  domain: Domain
  // Domain-specific options.
  // Used for inputs relevant to the domain, but not part of the domain string.
  // If a domain has no associated options, an empty object should be sent.
  // Example: { "authorization": <signature> } for an account-restricted domain.
  options: EIP712Object
  // Query message. A blinded elliptic curve point encoded in base64.
  blindedMessage: string
  // Client-specified session ID.
  sessionID: Optional<string>
}

interface Domain {
  // Unique name of the domain. (e.g. "ODIS Password Domain")
  name: string
  // Version number. Allows for backwards incompatible changes.
  version: string
  // Arbitrary key-value pairs.
  // MUST be serializeable to EIP-712 encoding.
  [key: string]: EIP712Value
}

interface DomainRestrictedSignatureResponse {
  success: boolean
  version: string
  error?: string
  signature?: string
}

interface Optional<T> {
  defined: boolean
  value: T
}
```

### Domain specifiers

Domain specifiers serve two functions:

- Define the input domain, such that it is uncorrelated to the output in any other domain.
- Specify the rate limiting function to be used in deciding whether to serve the request.

In order to provide flexibility and support future extensions, the domain specifier is structured
and may be one of a number of implemented types.

In the domain specifiers, two fields MUST be provided: `name` and `version`. Together, these select
which set of rules the service will apply to the request. Rule sets are included in the ODIS
implementation, and new rulesets may be added over time by software upgrades. Supported `name` and
`version` pairs MUST come from a finite set, and the service MUST return an error if the `name` and
`vesion` in a request are not recognized.

Updating a ruleset in a way that would change the rules applied to existing domains SHOULD be
accompanied by an increase in the `version` number. Domain names SHOULD be human-readable. Version
numbers SHOULD be whole integers.

A domain `name` and `version` MAY be deprecated such that the service will return an error for new
requests. Deprecation of a domain will make all secrets derived under that domain inaccessible.
Depending on the application, it is likely to be very difficult to fully deprecate a domain, as
users will need to actively migrate any usages from the deprecated domain.

With a given `name` and `version`, a number of additional fields MAY be specified to act as
parameters for the rate limiting ruleset and to establish the context. In order to ensure
deterministic serialization, each `name` and `version` MUST correspond to a single type definition.
Note that adding a field to an existing domain is a backwards incompatible change.

Changing any field in the domain specifier, results in a new domain with completely unrelated
output. (e.g. an attacker cannot simply dial down the security level of a domain. If they tried,
they would get useless output.)

In addition to the domain string, a ruleset MAY accept a number of "domain options". Domain options
are defined by and are relevant to a particular ruleset, but are not part of the domain (i.e. their
value does not effect the function output).

Note that domain options, unlike domains themselves, are considered "subjective" in that a client
may submit a different valid set of domain options (e.g. a different signature) to each ODIS signer
without effecting their ability to reconstruct the complete secret.

#### Examples

The following examples are provided to help understand the scheme. They are for illustrative
purposes only and will likely not be implemented as described here.

**Linear backoff:** A rate limiting scheme allowing up to a given number of requests in a defined
time period could be implemented as a linear backoff with some amount of saved-up quota cap.

```typescript
type LinearBackoffDomain = {
  name: "ODIS Linear Backoff Domain"
  version: "1"
  // Length of time, in milliseconds, to refresh a single unit of quota.
  // Undefined refresh time indicates that the quota never refreshes (hard cap).
  refresh: Optional<number>
  // Maximum number of saved quota.
  cap: number
  // Unique string to identify the "instance" of this rate limited domain.
  salt: Optional<string>
}
```

**Not before:** Useful in the lotteries and other random-selection based protocols, a domain could
be created to restrict requests before a particular time, but makes the output publicly available
after.

```typescript
type NotBeforeDomain = {
  name: "ODIS Not Before Domain"
  version: "1"
  // Unix time after which this domain can be queried.
  notBefore: number
}
```

**Peppered:** Useful in the context of hardening encryption keys for non-public ciphertexts, a
domain could be defined that requires a signature from a pepper-derived key-pair. The pepper may be
stored alongside the ciphertext.

```typescript
type PepperedDomain = {
  name: "ODIS Peppered Domain"
  version: "1"
  // Celo address of a key-pair derived from the pepper.
  address: string
  // Maximum number of requests that can be made against this domain.
  cap: Optional<number>
}

type PepperedDomainOptions = {
  // EIP-712 signature over the entire request.
  signature: string
}
```

**Phone number hashing:** The current ODIS rate limiting scheme could be implemented as a particular
domain in the new API. A domain string and options could be written as follows:

```typescript
type PhoneNumberDomain = {
  name: "ODIS Phone Number Domain"
  version: "1"
}

type PhoneNumberDomainOptions = {
  // Celo account address. Query is charge against this account's quota.
  account: string
  // Signature from the account, or authorized signer for the account.
  authorization: string
  // Optional on-chain identifier. Unlocks additional quota if the
  // account is verified as an owner of the identifier.
  hashedPhoneNumber: Optional<string>
}
```

**Smart contract access controlled:** Useful for expanding the set of use cases to community derived
ones. The address of a smart contract implementing the following interface will be a parameter in
the domain.

```solidity
interface OdisAccessController {
  function shouldAllowOdisRequest(bytes calldata domainData, bytes calldata authorization) external view returns(bool);
}
```

For example, this contract could check that a user owns a certain NFT or has burned a fee before
being allowed access to the signature. The signature would be applied to the domain and the returned
value from the contract function.

```typescript
type SmartContractDomain = {
  name: "ODIS Smart Contract Domain"
  version: "1"
  // Address of the contract that controls access to this domain.
  // Call will occur as a view call at the chain head upon receiving
  // the request to determine rate limiting.
  contractAddress: string
  // Specified to ensure an unambiguous smart contract is resolved.
  // An ODIS given service is likely to support only a single chain.
  chainId: number
  // Arbitrary bytes to be included in the smart contract call for
  // use by the contract logic.
  domainData: Optional<string>
}

type SmartContractDomainOptions = {
  // Optional parameter to avoid issues if the ODIS service node is behind.
  // When specified, the authorization check should not occur against a block
  // prior to the specified number.
  notBeforeBlock: Optional<number>
  // Arbitrary bytes to be included in the smart contract call for use by the
  // contract logic. Intended to be a signature or other authorization string.
  authorization: string
}
```

### Optional domain endpoints

All valid domains MUST implement the signature request. Additionally, a given domain MAY support
additional functionality through optional API endpoints. In particular, two are defined below to
check the available quota for a given domain, and to disable a domain.

#### Quota status

In many applications, it is useful for a client to have detailed information about what quota is
available. For example, if the domain is used for a password-derived encryption key, it is important
to rotate to a new domain instance if quota is running low on the existing one. If quota is entirely
used on that domain instance, the derived secret may become unrecoverable.

Each domain type has its own quota accounting rules and state, therefore there is no way to
construct a generic representation of available quota on all domains. It is expected that most
domains will maintain some amount of state (i.e. number of queries made against a domain) in a
database for the purpose of quota accounting. Domain quota state SHOULD be made available to the
client through the following API unless privacy concerns prevent making this information available.
(E.g. If a domain imposes an IP address based quota, this API should not return the complete list of
all IP addresses that have queried the API to the user).

In the response, the status field SHOULD contain the relevant state used by the service for rate
limiting. This status information SHOULD include whether or not the domain is disabled, if the
domain supports disabling.

Similar to the signature request, the quota status request MAY include a number of domain-specific
options. Note that the valid options for the quota status request MAY be distinct from the valid
options for the signature request.

Note that different ODIS signers may have distinct views on a domain's quota status. This can be the
case if a request was not received by all signers. Clients SHOULD handle this possible discrepancy
by checking their quota with all, or at least a quorum of signers, and taking their quota to be most
restrictive result of the least restrictive quorum.

```typescript
// POST /domain/quotaStatus
// Headers:
//   Content-Type: application/json
interface DomainQuotaStatusRequest {
  // Domain specification.
  domain: Domain
  // Domain-specific options.
  options: EIP712Object
  // Client-specified session ID.
  sessionID: Optional<string>
}

interface DomainQuotaStatusResponse {
  success: boolean
  version: string
  error?: string
  status?: object
}
```

#### Disable domain

In some applications it is useful for clients to have an option to disable a domain such that no
further signature requests will be accepted. For example, if the domain is used for a
password-derived encryption key, the old domain instance should be disabled upon domain instance
rotation such that an attacker who gains access to the old ciphertext cannot use the old domain to
make guesses on the user's password.

Similar to the signature request, the disable domain request MAY include a number of domain-specific
options. Note that the valid options for the disable domain request MAY be distinct from as the valid
options for the signature request.

Upon receiving a valid request to disable a supported domain, the service MUST mark the domain as
disabled in its database. Disabling a domain SHOULD be permanent. The service MAY delete any other
state information for a permanently disabled domain. Any signature requests received for a disabled
domain MUST result in a error response. Checking whether a domain is disabled SHOULD occur before
quota checks such that the error response indicates the domain is disabled.

```typescript
// POST /domain/disable
// Headers:
//   Content-Type: application/json
interface DisableDomainRequest {
  // Domain specification.
  domain: Domain
  // Domain-specific options.
  options: EIP712Object
  // Client-specified session ID.
  sessionID: Optional<string>
}

interface DisableDomainResponse {
  success: boolean
  version: string
  error?: string
  status?: object
}
```

### Domain serialization

Because any variation in the domain string, by design, results in an unpredictable change in the
output, there must be a canonical (i.e. deterministic) serialization for each given domain string.
Further, there must not be a collision in the encoded domain strings between two semantically
different domain specifiers (i.e. the encoding function must be injective). This matches the
requirements for the encoding function specified in
[EIP-712](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-712#specification). As a result, this proposal adopts
their encoding function for its domains specifiers.

In order to implement EIP-712 hashing, each domain type MUST be expressed as an EIP-712 domain and
type. Domain type definitions MAY be originally written in another format as long as there is a
deterministic and injective mapping to the EIP-712 definition, such as the mapping for a subset of
TypeScript types defined below.

Note that in addition to the domain, the entire request SHOULD be serializeable as an EIP-712
object. This allows hashing and signing of the full requests. In particular, this means that an
EIP-712 type definition SHOULD be provided for the domain options.

#### Mapping TypeScript to EIP-712 types

In order to hash a given `Domain` type, we must first define it as a EIP-712 object. As shown
above, domains may be represented as TypeScript types, in which case they need to be mapped to an
equivalent EIP-712 object. In this section is an example mapping from TypeScript types to EIP-712.

The EIP-712 type name SHOULD be equal to the interface name. Fields within the EIP-712 type SHOULD
be sorted by name. Values SHOULD be mapped from their TypeScript types to the corresponding EIP-712
type. Specifically:

* `string`  -> `string`
* `number`  -> `int256` or `uint256`
* `boolean` -> `bool`

As an example, the TypeScript type `interface Tree { family: string, height: number, alive: boolean}`
would result in the EIP-712 type string `Tree(bool alive,string family,uint256 height)`.

Optional values can be included in Domains by using the TypeScript type `Optional<T>{defined:
boolean; value: T}` and its associated EIP-712 type, with `T` replaced by the EIP-712 type name.
When serialized, `value` MUST be set to the zero value of the type when `defined` is `false`. The
zero value of a type is the value when all atomic types are set to zero, and dynamic types (`string`
and `bytes`) are empty. Note that the hash of the encoded zero value of two distinct types may be
distinct (i.e. it is not equal to the empty hash).

When hashing a subtype of `Domain`, the EIP-712 domain is formed by taking the required `name` and
`version` fields to populate the respective fields in an `EIP712Domain`. Other fields of
`EIP712Domain`, such as `chainId` are not included.

As an example, the following instance of a `LinearBackoffDomain` is hashed:
```typescript
const domain: LinearBackoffDomain = {
  name: "ODIS Linear Backoff Domain",
  version: "1",
  cap: 10,
  salt: {
    defined: true,
    value: "saltvalue",
  },
  refresh: {
    defined: false,
    value: 0,
  },
}
```

```text
domainSeparator = keccak256(
  keccak256("EIP712Domain(string name,string version)") ||
  keccak256("ODIS Linear Backoff Domain") || keccak256("1")
)
typeHash = keccak256(
  "LinearBackoffDomain(uint256 cap,string name,Optional<uint256> refresh,Optional<string> salt,string version)" ||
  "Optional<uint256>(bool defined,uint256 value)" ||
  "Optional<string>(bool defined,string value)"
)
structHash = keccak256(
  typeHash ||
  0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000A ||
  keccak256("ODIS Linear Backoff Domain") ||
  keccak256(
    keccak256("Optional<uint256>(bool defined,uint256 value)") ||
    0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 ||
    0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
  ) ||
  keccak256(
    keccak256("Optional<string>(bool defined,string value)") ||
    0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000001 ||
    keccak256("saltvalue")
  ) ||
 keccak256("1")
)
encoded = 0x1901 || domainSeparator || structHash
```

### Signatures

Signatures are a useful primitive for authenticated rate limiting (e.g. allowing a higher rate limit
to the owners of verified accounts on Celo). In order to facilitate this, the entire request struct
SHOULD be deterministically hashed, specifically using EIP-712.

Domains that make use of signatures for authentication of requests (e.g. the `PepperedDomain`
example above) SHOULD include the signature field in the domain options. Additional fields MAY also
be included, such as an expiration time or nonce.

Signatures SHOULD be verified over the entire request, excluding the signature itself. Specifically,
the message against which a signature is verified SHOULD be obtained by first setting the signature
field value to its zero value (e.g. empty string), then hashing the `DomainRestrictedSignatureRequest`
object via EIP-712.

Serializing an API request SHOULD the type mapping defined above and the following EIP-712 domains:

* `DomainRestrictedSignatureRequest` -> `{ name: "ODIS Domain Restricted Signature Request", version: "1" }`
* `DomainQuotaStatusRequest` -> `{ name: "ODIS Domain Quota Status", version: "1" }`
* `DisableDomainRequest` -> `{ name: "ODIS Disable Domain Request", version: "1" }`

### Retry handling

If a signer receives a `DomainRestrictedSignatureRequest` that exactly matches a request that it
previously answered without error (i.e. it's EIP-712 hash is identical), the signer MAY respond to
respond to the repeated request with a POPRF evaluation. If they do, the signer MUST NOT make any
alterations to quota for related to that request.

Responding to exact retries is allowed, and does not create an opportunity for a man-in-the-middle
to gain any information about the request, because the requests are blinded with a factor that only
the client knows (i.e. they are effectively end-to-end encrypted). It must not effect quota
accounting because if replayed requests consume quota, then it offers a method for DoS against the
client.

### HTTP Transport

When requested over HTTP, which is the primary proposed transport, the following HTTP semantics
SHOULD be followed.

Response bodies SHOULD be JSON encoded, including in the success and error cases. In error cases,
an error message SHOULD be included in the response.

<!-- TODO(victor): After some more thought, its unclear if using these response codes is the best.
Consider having all responses use a common HTTP code with the error noted in the response body
instead -->

If a given `name` and `version` are not recognized by an ODIS signer, or the request is to an
optional endpoint not supported by the given domain, the service SHOULD return a `404: Not Found`
error. If a given `name` and `version` are recognized, but are deprecated, it SHOULD return a `410:
Gone` error. Signers SHOULD keep a list of all old domain names and version, even if they are no
longer supported.

When a user's request is rejected for violating the rate limiting of a domain, the service SHOULD
respond with `429: Too Many Requests`. If waiting would allow for additional requests against
the same domain, the service SHOULD include the `Retry-After` header to specify how long the client
must wait. ODIS servers MAY apply additional rate limiting, such as by IP address. Any rate limiting
rules outside of those applied per domain MUST be counted against first, such that a request
dropped by optional rate limiting rules will not be counted against the domain quota.

Requests which fail authentication, such as when a domain requires a signature but none is provided,
SHOULD receive a `401: Unauthorized` response status. Requests for signatures on a disabled domain
SHOULD receive a `403: Forbidden` response status.

### Key management

<!-- TODO(victor) Replace this Notion link when the proposal is written up as a CIP -->
Because ODIS' current OPRF function operates with the same cryptographic primitives as the [proposed
function](https://www.notion.so/pOPRF-Cryptography-Proposal-493f1099460940f8a5d7dee4c78b4442), and
because its a bad idea in general to reuse keys, implementation of this proposal MUST use a new set
of keys, not used in any other service.

Keys used in this service SHOULD be generated through a DKG ceremony amongst the servers that will
operate the service. This new public key SHOULD be distributed along with client implementations and
used to verify the values returned from the new API. Note that the existing ODIS OPRF key will
continue to be used to verify output from the existing API.

### Cryptographic interface

Implementation of a domain-restricted hashing function is built on top of a partial
[oblivious](http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~tal/4261/F19/hugo-columbia-oprf.pdf) [pseudorandom
function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudorandom_function_family) (pOPRF). It extends the
existing OPRF, currently implemented by ODIS, by adding a second input, which is not blinded, and
can be used by the pOPRF for rate limiting.

With respect the client, this functionality has the interface $F_K(d,m)$ where $d$, $m$, and the
output are binary strings. $K$ is a public key which commits to the output of the function, and
allows for verification. $d$ is considered the "domain string" and is visible to the pOPRF service.
$m$ is the message string, and is hidden from the pOPRF service. Both strings are combined
cryptographically in a one-way function to form the output.

Multiple candidate implementations exist for this functionality. Linked below is the proposed
cryptographic design for use in the ODIS pOPRF service. Other implementation with the same interface
may also be used to implement the following service design.

Note that in the proposed interface, and in the function proposal below, only a single public key,
and corresponding shared service key, is used to produce and verify outputs from the pOPRF
regardless of the domain. As a result only a single key needs to be generated via DKG for this
functionality, and the client only needs to obtain a single public key. (Other functionalities,
namely the current ODIS OPRF, will need separate keys)

<!-- TODO(victor) Replace this Notion link when the proposal is written up as a CIP -->
[pOPRF Cryptography Proposal](https://www.notion.so/pOPRF-Cryptography-Proposal-493f1099460940f8a5d7dee4c78b4442)

## Backwards Compatibility

Backwards compatibility for current users of ODIS is ensured because this proposal leaves in place
all existing functionality, including the public keys currently used to operate the service.

## Security Considerations

Incorrect implementation or operation of the ODIS service can have very serious effects on users of
the service. In particular, a bug in the rate limiting code or compromise of a threshold of nodes
could allow an attacker to bypass rate limiting and derive a user's secret from its hash or other
commitment.

Implementing this proposal involves writing new code to be included in the ODIS service, which
implies a potential increase in the attack surface and opportunities to introduce security
vulnerabilities. Care should be taken to ensure the correctness of the implementation, including
testing, careful code review, and potentially third-party audits.

## License

This work is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
