---
cip: 48
title: Gas Repricing For Celo
author: Joshua Gutow <@trianglesphere>
discussions-to: https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/issues/281
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Ring 0
created: 2021-08-25
license: Apache 2.0
---

## Simple Summary
Increases gas cost for `SLOAD`, `*CALL`, `BALANCE`, `EXT*` and `SELFDESTRUCT` when used for the first time in a transaction

## Abstract
Increase the gas cost of `SLOAD` (`0x54`) to 800, and the `*CALL` opcode family (`0xf1`, `f2`, `f4`, `fA`), `BALANCE` `0x31` and the `EXT*` opcode family (`0x3b`, `0x3c`, `0x3f`) to 900. Exempts (i) precompiles, and (ii) addresses and storage slots that have already been accessed in the same transaction, which get a decreased gas cost. Additionally reforms `SSTORE` metering and `SELFDESTRUCT` to ensure “de-facto storage loads” inherent in those opcodes are priced correctly.


## Motivation
The gas charged per opcode should reflect the amount of time spent on that operation. As the state size grows, the time to run a state access opcode increases logarithmically. In addition, there is a large difference in time between reading state from disk (cold) and hitting a cache (warm).

## Specification
Copy the specification of [EIP-2929](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2929) except change the constants to be the following:
Parameters
| Constant | Value |
| -------- | -------- |
| `COLD_SLOAD_COST`          | 800     |
| `COLD_ACCOUNT_ACCESS_COST` | 900     |
| `WARM_STORAGE_READ_COST`   | 100 |

### SSTORE changes

Follow [EIP-2929](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2929), but use the modified parameters when performing the calculation.


## Rationale
As the state size of the Celo network grows, it is important to properly meter gas; however, while the state size is smaller than Ethereum, we do not need to charge as much for operations. These changes are implemented to maintain compatibility with Ethereum tooling & expectations. In addition, this signals that the Celo network will reprice gas operations in the future.

## Backwards Compatibility
This could cause problems for users that hardcode gas used or contracts that rely on Solidity's `transfer` functionality.

## Test Cases
TODO

## Implementation
In progress

## Security Considerations
As with any gas cost increasing EIP, there are three possible cases where it could cause applications to break:

1. Fixed gas limits to sub-calls in contracts
2. Applications relying on contract calls that consume close to the full gas limit
3. The 2300 base limit given to the callee by ETH-transferring calls

The Celo network has not changed gas pricings before, and these concerns have not been analyzed in the context of the Celo network. Because the Ethereum network has repriced gas before, most ethereum dapps and tooling should be compatible.

## License
This work is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.

## Sources
Vitalik Buterin, Martin Swende, "EIP-2929: Gas cost increases for state access opcodes," Ethereum Improvement Proposals, no. 2929, September 2020. [Online serial]. Available: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2929.
