---
cip: 50
title: Optional Replay Protection
author: Gastón Ponti (@gastonponti)
discussions-to: <URL>
status: Draft
type: <Standards Track, Meta or Informational>
category (*only required for Standards Track): <Ring 0, 1, 2, 3>
created: 2021-11-18
requires (*optional): <CIP number(s)>
replaces (*optional): <CIP number(s)> (changes part of the cip35(?))
license: Apache 2.0
---

This is the suggested template for new CIPs.

Note that a CIP number will be assigned by an editor. When opening a pull request to submit your CIP, please
use an abbreviated title in the filename, `cip-draft_title_abbrev.md`.

## Simple Summary
Revert one of the changes added in the [CIP-35](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/blob/master/CIPS/cip-0035.md) which made the replay protection (see [EIP-155](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-155.md)) mandatory

## Abstract
A short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.

## Motivation
Making the replay protection mandatory breaks our compatibility with Ethereum. EIPs as for example the 1820 depend exclusive in not having that limitation. If our biggest concern was to avoid errors or confusion between chains, that should be check by our tooling or rpc api calls, not a evm limitation.

## Specification
This change requires activation as part of a hard fork. As of `FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER` clients MUST accept transactions that had not set the chainId

## Rationale

If we want to be completely compatible with Ethereum, this should be addressed. The CIP35 changed that without being completely conscient on how that would affect the compatibility.

## Backwards Compatibility
All CIPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The CIP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. CIP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.

## Test Cases
Test cases for an implementation are mandatory for CIPs that are affecting consensus changes. Other CIPs can choose to include links to test cases if applicable.

## Implementation
The implementations must be completed before any CIP is given status "Final", but it need not be completed before the CIP is accepted. While there is merit to the approach of reaching consensus on the specification and rationale before writing code, the principle of "rough consensus and running code" is still useful when it comes to resolving many discussions of API details.

## Security Considerations
All CIPs must contain a section that discusses the security implications/considerations relevant to the proposed change. Include information that might be important for security discussions, surfaces risks and can be used throughout the life cycle of the proposal. E.g. include security-relevant design decisions, concerns, important discussions, implementation-specific guidance and pitfalls, an outline of threats and risks and how they are being addressed. CIP submissions missing the "Security Considerations" section will be rejected. A CIP cannot proceed to status "Final" without a Security Considerations discussion deemed sufficient by the reviewers.

## License
This work is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
