---
cip: 44
title: Left/Right Constrained Pseudorandom Functions for use in Celo protocols
author: Mikerah Quintyne-Collins (@Mikerah), Kobi Gurkan (@kobigurkan), Philipp Jovanovic (@daeinar)
discussions-to: https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/issues/270
status: Draft
type: Standards
category (only required for Standards Track): Ring 3
created: 2021-08-10
license: Apache 2.0
---

## Simple Summary
The goal of this CIP is to specify *left/right constrained pseudorandom functions (PRFs)*, a cryptographic primitive introduced in [BW13](BW13), for use in Celo protocols. 

## Abstract
Celo is a mobile-first blockchain protocol that seeks to facilitate making cryptocurrency payments from mobile devices. As such, Celo has developed a series of subprotocols for enabling users to utilize their phone numbers for various aspects of the Celo protocol. Since phone numbers are tied directly to users' identities, it is of paramount importance to put appropriate protection mechanisms into place that ensure users' privacy. To this end, cLabs has developed and deployed the [Phone Number Privacy](PNP) subprotocol on Celo and is currently working on several additional enhancements. Some of these mechanisms rely on so-called *left/right constrained PRFs*, a cryptographic primitive that is useful to build privacy-preserving identity-based protocols.

This CIP specifies the parameters and algorithms for left/right constrained PRFs for use in Celo protocols.

## Motivation
This CIP introduces left/right constrained PRFs that can be used to develop improved privacy-protection mechanisms for users on the Celo blockchain.

## Specification
We follow the specification of (left/right) constrained PRFs as introduced in [BW13](BW13).

### Constrained PRFs
Given a key space `K`, a domain `X`, range `Y`, let `F` be a pseudorandom function that takes as inputs `(k, x)` for `k` in `K` and `x` in `X` and returns `F(k, x)` in `Y`. 

We say that `F` is constrained with respect to a set of constraints **`S`**, such that **`S`** is a subset of the powerset of `X`, if there is a new key space `K_c`, such that we can define the following functions:
- `F.constrain(k, S)` which provides a constrained key `k_S` in `K_c`. This key `k_S` enables the evaluation of `F(k, x)` for all `x` in `S` and no other `x`. It takes as input `k` in `K` and `S` in **`S`**. Note that although this algorithm is a randomized algorithm, in our instantiation, it is not a randomized algorithm.
- `F.eval(k_S, x)` which outputs `F(k, x)` if `x` is in `S` and `nil` otherwise. This is a deterministic algorith which takes as inputs `k_S` in `K_c` and `x` in `X`.

In practice, `S` is usually a set of predicates `PP` such that for any `p` in `PP`, we have `F.eval(k_p, x) = F(k, x)` if `p(x) = 1` and `F.eval(k_p, x) = nil` otherwise.

### Left/right constrained PRFs
Let `F: K x X^2 -> Y` be a PRF. Then, `F` is a left/right constrained PRF if `F` is constrained by the following predicate set `P_LR = {p_wL, p_wR: w in X}` where `p_wL(x,y) = 1` iff `x = w` and `p_wR(x,y) = 1` iff `y = w`. Left/right constrained PRFs have the property such that for all points in `(w, y)` in `X^2`, `F(k_p_wL, (w, y))` can be evaluated at all the points in which the left side is fixed to `w`. Similarly for right constrained PRFs. 

We now instantiate a left/right constrained PRF based on bilinear pairings to be used in the Celo ecosystem.

Let `K` be `Z_p`, the set of integers modulo `p`, and let `(G_1, G_2, G_T)` be the pairing-friendly curve BLS12-377 with optimal ate bilinear-pairing operation `e: G_1 x G_2 -> G_T` as defined in [CIP30](CIP30). 

Then we define `F(k, (x,y)) := e(H_1(x), H_2(y))^k`, where
- `H_1()` is the hash to `G_1` function defined in [HASH_TO_CURVE](HASH_TO_CURVE),
- `H_2()` is the hash to `G_2` function defined in [HASH_TO_CURVE](HASH_TO_CURVE),
- `k` is a secret key chosen uniformly at random from `K`.

The constrained keys for the predicates `p_wL` and `p_wR` are defined as: `k_x* = H_1(x*)^k` and `k_y* = H_2(y*)^k` where `(x*, y*)` is in `X^2`.


## Rationale
The main rational for this CIP is to provide a cryptographic primitive that can be used in identity-based contexts (phone number privacy, validator keys, etc) while still reusing Celo's fundamental cryptography toolkit (pairing-based and threshold-based cryptography). This would allow for minimal changes to the protocol level of how Celo works while still allowing for new subprotocols to be built to provide better privacy for Celo users.

## Backwards Compatibility
There are no backwards compatibility issues with this CIP.

## Test Cases

TBD

## Implementation

TBD

## Security Considerations
- Care must be taken when reusing BLS12-377 private keys for use with this CIP. 
- For threshold-variants of the proposed left/right constrained PRF, care must be taken as to not allow for rogue key attacks. 

## References
- [BW13](https://eprint.iacr.org/2013/352.pdf): Research paper introducing left-right constrained pseudorandom functions.
- [PNP](https://docs.celo.org/celo-codebase/protocol/identity/phone-number-privacy): Phone number privacy protocol overview.
- [CIP30](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/blob/master/CIPs/cip-0030.md): Precompile for BLS12-377 curve operations.
- [CIP22](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/blob/master/CIPs/cip-0022.md): Upgrade epoch SNARK data for flexibility, slashability, and security.
- [HASH_TO_CURVE](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-bls-snark-rs/blob/eca15ffed3984601cb441600ba3002d12f339e5f/crates/bls-crypto/src/hash_to_curve/try_and_increment.rs#L81): Hash to curve implementation used in Celo.

## License
This work is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
