---
cip: 35
title: Support for Ethereum-compatible transactions
author: Or Neeman (@oneeman)
discussions-to: https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/issues/166
status: Draft
type: Standards
category: Ring 0
created: 2021-02-17
license: Apache 2.0
---

### Terminology

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC 2119](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119.html).

## Abstract

This CIP adds support for an Ethereum-compatible transactions, which don't include the three fields which are unique to Celo transactions: `feecurrency`, `gatewayfeerecipient`, and `gatewayfee`. This would enable Celo to accept transactions generated and signed by Ethereum wallets and other Ethereum tooling, which would let Celo users and developers choose from a among wider range of tools, and reduce the initial friction for new users coming from the Ethereum ecosystem.

## Motivation

- As the older and more mature platform, Ethereum has a much wider range of wallets and tooling compared to Celo. Support for Ethereum-compatible transactions would allow much of this software to work with Celo.
- Many users coming from Ethereum are already familiar with wallets such as Metamask, and would likely prefer transacting on Celo using these wallets rather than having to install Celo-specific forks or completely new software such as `celocli`.
- Users of cross-chain bridges, in particular, will need to interact with both the Celo blockchain and other blockchains (usually Ethereum). The ability to use a single wallet to interact with both Celo and Ethereum would reduce the friction in doing this.
- Compatibility with Ethereum signers such as Metamask would enable dapp developers to make use of [Web3Modal](https://github.com/Web3Modal/web3modal), easing the process of porting Ethereum dapps to Celo.

## Specification

This change requires activation as part of a hard fork. As of `FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER` clients MUST accept transactions in either of two formats:

1. Normal Celo transactions
2. Ethereum-compatible transactions

Note that the Normal Celo transactions format simply represents Celo transactions as they currently exist. The only change to them is an additional field when represented as JSON (see below).

### RLP transaction format

When RLP-encoded, the two transaction formats consist of the following RLP lists:

1. Normal Celo transactions: `(nonce, gasprice, gaslimit, feecurrency, gatewayfeerecipient, gatewayfee, recipient, amount, data, v, r, s)`
2. Ethereum-compatible transactions: `(nonce, gasprice, gaslimit, recipient, amount, data, v, r, s)`

### Transaction signing and signature verification

For the purpose of transaction signing and of validating transaction signatures, clients MUST use the following as the "signing data" (which is RLP-encoded and hashed, and the result of that is then signed):

1. For normal Celo transactions: `(nonce, gasprice, gaslimit, feecurrency, gatewayfeerecipient, gatewayfee, recipient, amount, data, chainid, 0, 0)`
2. For Ethereum-compatible transactions: `(nonce, gasprice, gaslimit, recipient, amount, data, chainid, 0, 0)`

### Transaction validation and processing

When validating and processing transactions, clients MUST treat Ethereum-compatible transactions as equivalent to normal Celo transactions with the following values filled in for the missing fields:

```
feecurrency: nil
gatewayfeerecipient: nil
gatewayfee: 0
```

### JSON representation and RPC methods

A new boolean field, `ethCompatible`, is to be added to transactions' representation in JSON format. Note that this addition represents a change from how Celo transactions are currently represented as JSON:

1. When representing a transactions in JSON format (e.g. in RPC methods such as `eth_getTransaction`, `eth_getBlock`, etc.), clients SHOULD include a boolean field called `ethCompatible`, which indicates whether the transaction is an Ethereum-compatible transaction (`true`) or a normal Celo transaction (`false`). This is necessary in order to know what should be used as the transaction's "signing data" (as described above).
2. When parsing a transaction from JSON format, clients SHOULD respect the `ethCompatible` value if one is supplied, and should treat the transaction as if `ethCompatible` were `false` if a value isn't specified.
3. When processing RPC requests which take a transaction object as an argument (namely: `eth_sendTransaction`, `eth_signTransaction`, `eth_call`, and `eth_estimateGas`), clients SHOULD give an error if `ethCompatible: true` is specified but non-trivial values are present for the Celo-only fields (i.e. if `feeCurrency` isn't nil, `gatewayFeeRecipient` isn't nil, or `gatewayFee` is specified and isn't zero).

## Rationale

As [Celo's blockchain client](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-blockchain) is a fork of Go Ethereum, Celo transactions are closely related to Ethereum transactions. The key difference is the three new fields added in Celo (`feecurrency`, `gatewayfeerecipient`, and `gatewayfee`). While these fields are currently required in Celo transactions, they are not essential: `feecurrency` is set to `nil` if one wishes to pay the transaction fees in CELO, while `gatewayfeerecipient` and `gatewayfee` are generally set to `nil` and `0` respectively, since a system for full node incentives is not yet in place. This naturally suggests the possibility of supporting transactions where these three fields are omitted entirely, resulting in a transaction format identical to Ethereum's. When decoding transactions from RLP, clients can identify the transaction format by the number of fields (12 for normal Celo transactions, 9 for Ethereum-compatible transactions).

The rest of the specification follows from that:

1. To be compatible with transactions signed by Ethereum wallets, the "signing data" for Ethereum-compatible transactions must match the "signing data" used in Ethereum (see [EIP-155](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-155.md))
2. To eliminate ambiguity as to how a transaction represented in JSON should be encoded to RLP and what the "signing data" for it should be, a new field is added to indicate whether it is a normal Celo transaction or an Ethereum-compatible transaction. Alternatively, it would have been possibly to make this implicit, relying on the presence or absence of the three fields. However, adding the `ethCompatible` field seemed preferable because (a) it results in a single set of fields in the JSON representation of both transaction types, (b) it is more explicit. Both of these are advantageous in the context of JSON being generated and parsed in different programming languages which may also vary as to whether they use static or dynamic typing.
3. To maintain backwards compatibility regarding JSON, `ethCompatible: false` can be inferred if the field is absent in a transaction's JSON.

## Implementation

- [Branch](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-blockchain/tree/oneeman/eth-compatible-transactions-poc)

## Backwards Compatibility

- Requires activation as part of a hard fork, since it introduces a new transaction format which is not currently valid in Celo.
- Normal Celo transactions will continue to function as they do currently. As a result, no change will be required in software which generates and signs transactions.
- Software which parses RLP-encoded transactions will need to add support for parsing Ethereum-compatible transactions, and for signing them or verifying their signatures using the right "signed data" (if signing transactions and verifying signatures is part of its functionality).
- Software which parses transactions from JSON will need to ensure that it doesn't stop working due to the presence of the new `ethCompatible` field. Depending on the software's functionality, it may need to be updated to make correct use of this new field (e.g. if verifying transaction signatures is part of the software's functionality, it will need to be updated to use the correct "signing data" for the transaction's transaction type).
- Software which serializes transaction to JSON format should be updated to include the `ethCompatible` field.

## Security Considerations

This would not create new security issues, aside from the possibility (inherent in any change) of vulnerabilities resulting from bugs.

## License

This work is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
