---
lang: en
cip: 0008
title: Expand Metadata to general off-chain storage
status: Draft
type: Ring 2
discussions-to:
author: @nambrot, @nategraf, @alexbharley
created: 2020-05-05
license: Apache 2.0
---

## Overview

In CIP3, the Celo protocol started with a simple off-chain storage mechanism mainly focused on claims an account can make about their off-chain identity and communicate to other participants in the network. Over time, there have been additional use cases which have similar access patterns that prompted the creation of `Metadata` in the first place. I.e. data that does not require the expensive cost of "hard consensus", instead just needs to be authenticated by a single party.

Prime examples include:

- Transaction metadata such as comments or encrypted messaging in general
- Profile information such as names or a profile pictures
- Unidirectional attestations like an audit or badges won in The Great Celo Stake Off
- Signed statements/claims by a party for release binaries/docker images/package hashes

## Goals

- Expand storage and indexing capabilities of this off-chain data
- Encode the notion of decryption keys
- Lightweight messaging system

## Proposed Solution

We propose to add another claim, called the `STORAGE` claim:

```json
{
  "type": "STORAGE",
  "timestamp": 1588886114907,
  "address": "https://example.com/celo_storage",
  "filterdataPaths": ".*"
}
```

This http address should be referred to as the root. The expectation here is that data can accessed via `root/${dataPath}`. A root can specify a [glob schema](https://github.com/isaacs/minimatch) with the `filterdataPaths` key to indicate what kind of data it stores. An account can make multiple `STORAGE` claims, both to increase availability, as well as effectively sharding this off-chain data. This CIP does not specify what to do in case of conflicts.

Here are some common ways of modeling applications into this format:

- For transaction metadata, the account can encrypt the metadata and put it in a file with the transaction hash as the metadata. Further CIPs could specify a standard for thee structure of that metadata.
  - `dataPath`: `/transactions/${transactionHash}`
  - file contents: Encrypted, structured transaction metadata (comments, or otherwise)
- Data in relation to other accounts could be communicated to other accounts with:
  - `dataPath`: `/accounts/${otherAccountAddress}`
  - file contents: Structured data such as:
    - `sessionKeys`: The session key(s) encrypted with dataEncryptionKey of `otherAccount` on `Accounts.sol`
    - `attestations`: These could be signed data attestating things such an audit or badges. An attested account could also store the attestations from the attestor here, as a client can just verify the signature of the attestor.
- Profile information could be stored on this system with:
  - `dataPath`: `/profile/name` or `/profile/picture`
  - file contents: the data unencrypted, or encrypted to session keys available to the recipients
- Releases:
  - `dataPath`: `/releases/${hashOfRelease}`
  - file contents: The signature of the key on the hash of the release

## Alternative Solutions

I considered doing storing all data on IPFS, however the tooling around IPFS as well as IPNS does not seem user-friendly enough to make a substantial number of users use this directly (or centralize anyways). A generic "HTTP-based file system" is proposed as it is the lowest common denominator. It can be served by a simple HTTP server, even popular VCS static page hosting or specialized service providers. The lock-in effect is minimal since data can be easily migrated, and multiple copies could even be hosted with multiple roots. Thus availabillity concerns relative to on-chain storage can be mitigated relatively well.

## Risks

More reliance on off-chain data and misunderstanding such reliance could lead to inconsistency or poor usability. Ultimately this is traded off against cost of storing data on-chain or in centralized services.

## Specification

### Signatures

All file contents should always be signed by an authorized signer of the account to prevent tampering by the file hoster. Clients may reject any unsigned data received from the storage root. Signatures should be stored along side the payload under `${dataPath}.signature` and to construct these signatures the signature specification [EIP712](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-712.md) is used. Where it doesn’t make sense to include the payload itself in the EIP712 object we instead include the keccak256 hash hex encoded. Below are some example payloads, one for hashed data and one for a simple name claim:

```js
{
    types: {
        EIP712Domain: {
            { name: 'name', type: 'string' },
            { name: 'version', type: 'string' },
            { name: 'chainId', type: 'uint256' }
        },
        ClaimWithPath: [
            { name: 'path', type: 'string' },
            { name: 'hash', type: 'string' }
        ]
    },
    domain: {
        name: 'CIP8 Claim',
        version: '1.0.0',
        chainId,
    },
    primaryType: 'ClaimWithPath',
    message: {
        path: '/account/picture',
        hash: '0x...'
    }
}
```

```js
{
    types: {
        EIP712Domain: {
            { name: 'name', type: 'string' },
            { name: 'version', type: 'string' },
            { name: 'chainId', type: 'uint256' }
        },
        Claim: {
            {name: 'name', type: 'string'}
        },
        ClaimWithPath: [
            { name: 'path', type: 'string' },
            { name: 'payload', type: 'Claim' }
        ]
    },
    domain: {
        name: 'CIP8 Claim',
        version: '1.0.0',
        chainId,
    },
    primaryType: 'ClaimWithPath',
    message: {
        path: '/account/name',
        payload: {
            name: 'Alex'
        },
    }
}
```

Signing over the path as well as the message itself prevents messages from being shuffled around by an attacker; a message is only valid in the intended context. The path should be normalized to the UTF8 encoding of the absolute URL path component, as specified in RFC 3986 § 3.3. Note that path does not include the storage root, query parameters, or fragment.

It is worth noting that this does not protect against the adversarial storage provider withholding or returning outdated data. Additionally, this does not protect against the adversary swapping out files. If the order, including the existence, of the data is critical, then the developer should consider falling back to on-chain data, as consensus on the current view of the data is required. A possible partial workaround is to add expiry to the schema.

### Privacy

We commonly expect users to share data only with a set of authorized peers. A profile picture, under the path `/profile/picture` might be shared only with the user’s friends. Creating and publishing a number of ciphertexts to a related path (e.g. `/profile/picture/{recipient address}`), each encrypted with a friend's public key would be one way to achieve this. It would ensure data integrity and confidentiality.

A problem with indexing the ciphertexts by recipient is that it reveals publicly every recipient of a given message. In the case of profile pictures, this would make public every “friend” with whom the picture is shared, and in the case of payment requests it would reveal that a request is pending from the user to a given peer. This data may be valuable to attackers looking to craft a spear-phishing attack, and may violate some users’ expectations of privacy.

To solve this we present a scheme that maintains both recipient privacy, to compute the storage path it requires the publisher's private data encryption key and the receivers public data encryption key. The path can be computed as follows:

```
label = PRF(ECDH(A, B), A || B || data_path)
ciphertext path = "/ciphertexts/" || hex(label)
```

Where A is the sender’s public key, B is the recipient’s public key, ECDH is a non-interactive key exchange requiring the private key for either A or B to evaluate, PRF is the pseudorandom function HMAC-SHA256, "ciphertexts" is a cosmetic path URL path prefix, and data path is the URL path suffix. ECDH produces a secp256k1 elliptic curve point, which is in SEC1-v2 compressed format and used as the key for PRF. Elliptic curve points (e.g. public keys and shared secrets) are represented in SEC1-v2 compressed representation. The message input to the PRF consists of the concatenation of the public key of the sender and the public key of the recipient (both in SEC1-v2 compressed representation), and the UTF8 encoding of the data path.

`A || B` is prepended to the data path for future compatibility with sender hiding. If both the sender and receiver upload messages to the same path prefix in order to share an “anonymity pool” and wish to, e.g., mutually share photos under the data path “profile/photo,” then this ensures there’s a unique ciphertext path for A sending a photo to B and B sending a photo to A.

A ciphertext path is easily computable from the data path and public keys of the sender and recipient, and knowledge of either private key. It is infeasible to compute without access to one of the two private keys, and it is also infeasible to determine the sender or recipient. (Although in CIP8 the sender is known because storage roots are not shared.)

### Encryption

To encrypt a file and share it with recipients, we first encrypt the message using a symmetric key, and then use asymmetric encryption to send that key to all the recipients. This is done as follows. For each file a fresh 16 byte message key and a fresh 16 byte IV are chosen at random. We encrypt the data (bytes) to produce the file ciphertext, where

```
file_ciphertext = IV || E(message_key, IV, data)
```

and E is AES-128-CTR. The file ciphertext is stored at `{data_path}.enc` and its corresponding ECDSA signature at `{data_path}.enc.signature`. ECIES encryptions of message keys are stored at the ciphertext path of `{data_path}.key` for each message recipient. Key encryptions should be signed as described above.

As an example, if the publisher wants to make their photo available with the data path `/profile/photo.jpg` they will choose a random message key and use it to encrypt the photo bytes. This encrypted photo will be stored at `/profile/photo.jpg.enc`, and a signature over the encrypted photo and path at `/profile/photo.jpg.enc.signature`. For each recipient, the publisher will calculate a ciphertext path, `/ciphertexts/{label}`, using the recipient's public key, for the data path /profile/photo.jpg.key and place the message key ECIES ciphertext there. A signature over the ciphertext and ciphertext path will be produced and stored at `/ciphertexts/{label}.signature`. Note that on that storage provider there is no actual data stored at `/profile/photo.jpg` or `/profile/photo.jpg.key`. Below is a directory structure of this example.

```
profile
├── photo.jpg.enc
└── photo.jpg.enc.signature
ciphertexts
├── {ciphertext label for “/profile/photo.jpg.key”}
└── {ciphertext label for “/profile/photo.jpg.key”}.signature
```

## Useful Links

- [The original Metadata CIP](https://github.com/celo-org/CIPs/blob/master/CIPs/0003.md)
- [CIP8 encryption client implementation in `celo-monrepo`](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/pull/5091)
