---
cip: 51
title: Federated Attestations Protocol
author: @eelanagaraj, @isabellewei
discussions-to: <URL>
status: Draft
type: Standards
category (*only required for Standards Track): Ring 0
created: 2022-06-29
license: Apache 2.0
---

## Overview

This CIP proposes a new version (from here referred to as ASv2) of the existing validator-run attestation protocol (CIP01, from here referred to as ASv1), which will leverage a federated set of independent issuers to perform attestations. It will also extend attestations beyond phone numbers to other types of off-chain identifiers (email addresses, social media accounts, etc.)

## Motivation

While offering a highly censorship- and fraud-resistant method for requesting phone number attestations, ASv1 results in frictions and suboptimal experiences for users, builders, and attestation service maintainers/operators.

**Users**:

- it can take several minutes to complete a verification flow
- requiring 3 SMS’s is unfamiliar for users
- verification success rates have hovered between 72-80%.

**Builders**:

- dApps must integrate with the current validator-run Attestation Service to be fully interoperable
- existing SDKs/docs to discover/resolve addresses are either non-existent, complicated, or scattered

**Maintainers/Operators**:

- coordinating upgrades across up to 100 participating validators is costly and slow
- operators experience churn in needing to upgrade their services
- monitoring and observing the performance of the system overall is complicated, and information is largely incomplete

ASv2 aims to improve verification rates, improve the wallet and end consumer experience, increase adoption of identity mappings, and encourage network effects of shared cross-application identity attestations.

## Specification

Under our proposal, individual wallets or other entities will act as issuers to implement verification flows and issue credentials attesting to ownership over users' identifiers (phone numbers, email addresses, social media accounts, etc.). _It is ultimately up to issuers to determine how to confirm that a user owns both a particular on-chain address and an off-chain identifier._

Ensuring interoperability of attestations across the ecosystem is a key component of our vision. Currently, phone number identifier → address mappings (attestations) are stored in `Attestations.sol`. Anyone can query ODIS for the phone number identifier, in order to perform the on-chain lookup of stored attestations, but the reverse is not true: phone number attestations that are not created through integrating with ASv1 are not currently discoverable from other dApps. The proposed Federated Attestation Protocol aims to reconcile the benefits of dApps having full control over their verification flow with the benefits of on-chain interoperability. Alongside `Attestations.sol` we implement a new on-chain general attestation registry `FederatedAttestations.sol`, which will allow anyone to issue and publish their own identifier ↔ address mappings. While any account can write to the registry contract, wallets/dApps can choose to read only mappings from issuers they trust.

## Implementation

### Identifiers

While issuers can choose to use identifiers in any format, we recommend using ODIS to derive identifiers that will be published on-chain. This offers a privacy-preserving standard that also allows for discoverability and interoperability. ODIS will be upgraded with the release of ASv2 to include prefix types beyond phone numbers to accomodate all identifier types.

In the future, we plan to allow for issuers to create attestations for the fact that a given identifier was derived using the “canonical” method described above, through the addition of metadata attestations. Identifiers derived using this “canonical” method could be used as a lightweight sybil resistant signal, as there is a one-to-one mapping between off-chain identities (such as phone numbers) and the derived identifier.

### Issuers

Issuers should create a separate signer key that is associated with their account for the express purpose of signing verifiable credentials. The `AttestationSigner` role should be assigned to this signer key. It is possible to authorize multiple signer keys for this role.

Attestation mappings are indexed by the address of the issuer. The benefit of using the issuer address instead of the signer address is that the issuer address never changes, while the signer key can be rotated or revoked. If a signer key has been compromised, the issuer can then accordingly remove invalid attestations or upload removed attestations.

### Data Schema

The on-chain registry of `FederatedAttestations.sol` has 3 main storage mappings

```java
struct OwnershipAttestation {
    address account;
    address signer;
    uint64 issuedOn;
    uint64 publishedOn;
    // using uint64 to allow for extra space to add parameters
}

// identifier -> issuer -> attestations
mapping(bytes32 => mapping(address => OwnershipAttestation[])) public identifierToAttestations;
// account -> issuer -> identifiers
mapping(address => mapping(address => bytes32[])) public addressToIdentifiers;
// unique attestation hash -> isRevoked
mapping(bytes32 => bool) public revokedAttestations;
```

The `issuedOn` field references the time at which the issuer completed their verification flow and signed the attestation, while the `publishedOn` field is set on-chain at the time at which the attestation is registered.

### Reading

Looking up attestations or identifiers requires that the reader has a list of trusted issuers that has been obtained off-chain. A maximum of 20 accounts can be associated with each identifier, and a maximum of 20 identifiers can be associated with each account.

### Writing

Anyone with a valid signature can register an attestation. If the issuer themself is directly registering an attestation, a signature is not needed. An attestation with the same identifier, issuer and address should not already be present.

### Revocation

To prevent invalid attestations from being re-registered in the registry, we implemented an `isRevoked` mapping that marks attestations that have been revoked. Attestations are represented by a unique hash over their `identifier`, `issuer`,`account`, `signer` and `issuedOn` fields. Revoking an attestation also deletes it from the `identifierToAttestations` and `addressToIdentifiers` mappings, creating the invariant that all attestations existing in the registry are necessarily valid/unrevoked. Attestations can be revoked by the issuer, the user, or any `AttestationSigner` authorized by the issuer.

If an issuer would like to revoke/delete multiple attestations, the `batchRevokeAttestations` function can be used, which offers convenience and gas savings.

### Attestation Signature

With ASv1, a signed attestation is just a signature over the hash of `{identifier}{account}`. We have decided to use EIP712 for ASv2, with the following structure:

```js
types: {
    EIP712Domain: [
        { name: 'name', type: 'string' },
        { name: 'version', type: 'string' },
        { name: 'chainId', type: 'uint256'},  
        { name: 'verifyingContract', type: 'address'}, 
    ],
    IdentifierOwnershipAttestation: [
        { name: 'identifier', type: 'bytes32' },
        { name: 'issuer', type: 'address'},
        { name: 'account', type: 'address' },
        { name: 'signer', type: 'address' },
        { name: 'issuedOn', type: 'uint256' },
    ],
},
primaryType: 'IdentifierOwnershipAttestation',
domain: {
  name: 'FederatedAttestations',
  version: '1.0',
  {chainId},
  verifyingContract: {contractAddress}
},
message: {
    identifier: string,
    issuer: string,
    account: string,
    signer: string,
    issuedOn: number,
}
```

## Backwards Compatibility

### Interoperability SDK

To address the fragmentation of credentials stored in `Attestations.sol` vs. `FederatedAttestations.sol`, an SDK will be created to resolve access to attestations from both ASv1 and ASv2. Further details [here](https://www.notion.so/clabsco/Federated-Attestation-Protocol-ASv2-05dc4843139842768ad9fe192cb46c00#55e61742befe49e0a55fb38e6f223172).

### Escrow

The Escrow contract has been upgraded to be compatible with both ASv1 and ASv2. New escrowed payments can specify a list of trusted issuers whose attestations will be accepted to redeem payments. The trusted issuer list can include phone-number attestation issuers from ASv2 in addition to the address of the `AttestationProxy` stored in `Registry.sol` to represent the attestations from ASv1 contained in `Attestations.sol`. This will provide backwards compatibility and increased flexibility for dApp developers.

## Further Work

We aim to later introduce metadata attestations in addition to ownership attestations. This would enable further information about an identifier to be claimed. Examples include phone number type, Twitter verification status, compliance with ODIS, etc. Furthermore, a more extensive system was originally imagined, where issuers issue [verifiable credentials](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/) and identifiers follow the [DID standard](https://www.w3.org/2019/08/did-20190828/). These credentials are custodied by the user, and optionally can be shared on-chain to be discoverable by other parties, or can be shared off-chain directly between stakeholders.

To allow for users to easily decide which issuers to trust, there are plans for designing smart contracts and corresponding tooling to create [crowdsourced trusted issuer registries](https://www.notion.so/clabsco/Decentralisation-and-Governance-d673afd33dbe4f8d8b70daa2ef6d4763).

We hope that the information in these attestations can later be used to create lightweight reputation and sybil resistance signals for various use cases.

## Further Reading

- [Federated Attestations Protocol](https://clabsco.notion.site/ASv2-On-chain-Registry-Protocol-47e7850656444c37973856e0634ee2f9) is the main high-level design doc with our intial overarching vision
- [Escrow Design Doc](https://clabsco.notion.site/Escrow-Design-Doc-WIP-2cc7507125964ab48c5061bbba479010) has further details on updates to the escrow contract
- [CIP1: Validator-Run Attestation Service](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/blob/master/CIPs/cip-0001.md) explains details of ASv1
