---
cip: 45
title: Modify Transaction Fee Check
author: Tong Wang <@yoduyodu>
discussions-to: https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/issues/274
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Ring 0
created: 2021-08-16
license: Apache 2.0
---

## Simple Summary
Paying transaction fees using non-native currencies should be feasible if a transactor has a balance greater than or equal to the sum of the fee and the transferred value.

## Abstract
When paying transaction fees, the transaction should be deemed as valid if the transactor's balance is greater than or equal to the transaction fee + transferred value. This CIP seeks to modify the transaction fee check rule.

## Specification
When checking if the balance covers the transaction fee in `state_transition` and `tx_pool`, it should pass if the balance `>=` transaction fee + transferred value. The current behavior is:
- For native currency(CELO), require balance >= fee.
- For non-native currencies(cUSD, cEUR, ...), require balance > fee.

## Rationale
- Add `transferred value` in fee check to align with Geth.
- Transaction fee checks should be consistent across using native currency CELO and other non-native currencies.

## Backwards Compatibility
This introduces a change in the transaction validity check.

## Test Cases
For native currency(CELO):
- Send a Tx with balance >= fee, but balance < fee + value: :white_check_mark: before HF block, :x: after.
- Send a Tx with balance >= fee + value: :white_check_mark: before HF block, :white_check_mark: after.
For non-native currencies(cUSD, cEUR, ...):
- Send a Tx with balance < fee + value: :x: before HF block, :x: after.
- Send a Tx with balance = fee, with value == 0 : :x: before HF block, :white_check_mark: after.
- Send a Tx with balance > fee + value: :white_check_mark: before/after HF block.

## Implementation
https://github.com/celo-org/celo-blockchain/pull/1664

Updated in https://github.com/celo-org/celo-blockchain/pull/1696/files

## Security Considerations
A more strict transaction validity check should imply less security risks.

## License
This work is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
