---
cip: 32
title: Attestation Incentives
author: Cody Born <cody@clabs.co>
discussions-to: <URL>
status: Draft
type: Standards
category: Ring 1
created: 2020-12-11
license: Apache 2.0
---


## Simple Summary

Encourage liveness and global coverage of the Attestation Service (AS) through the incentivization of successful customer onboarding. This CIP will introduce slashing opportunities in the case of long term outages of the AS.

## Abstract

The Attestation Service performs a critical role in user onboarding when linking a phone number to a Celo address. When AS nodes are down or have poor coverage they lead to a degraded user experience. This proposal focuses on explicit incentives to run a highly available AS.

## Motivation

Despite Validator uptime on Celo being phenominal, the maintenance of the AS nodes are [sometimes neglected](https://metabase.celo-networks-dev.org/public/dashboard/b0a27650-1d62-4645-81d7-26ff7546ff0d?date_filter=past2weeks~). Today the implicit motivation to run an AS is to contribute to the health of the network which can help procure more votes from those that are interested in the success of Celo. This proposal attempts to make the incentive more explicit by introducing a slashing penalty in the case of prolonged AS downtime.

Rather than introducing a slashing policy which punishes poor performance, we could add additional reward to validators for great AS performance. We haven't ruled this option out and will likely institute it once we have more granular metrics (see [Using completion rate](#using-completion-rate)). Today, many validators put a good amount of effort into maintaining a highly available Attestation Service. Slashing based on poor performance ensures that everyone is putting in this same level of effort to grow our network for the same compenstation.

In order to slash effectively, we will need an on-chain measure of AS availability. We're researching ways to provide this measurement in a manner that ensures validators are correctly rewarded when their AS is healthy and correctly punished when their AS is down. Until we have a large number of users, it's difficult to isolate a signal we can be confident in as a community. Therefore, we're starting with a conservative approach of measuring a minimum completion threshold over a period of time.

## Specification

- `B` is the number of consecutive blocks in which an elected Asstestation Service is required to complete at least one attestation.
- `P` is the penalty amount that is slashed in a slashing event.
- `R` is the reward amount that a slasher is granted.
- `B`, `P`, and `R` are easily configurable via governance proposals.

We will introduce a new `AttestationSlasher` contract which allows slashing of stake if a completed attestation hasn't been observed in the past `B` blocks. To achieve this, we will upgrade the `Attestations` contract to register the selection and completion events in the new `AttestationSlasher` contract. The `AttestationSlasher` will contain the following state to track the latest block number that an attestation was requested/completed on:

```js
// Tracks the last time an attestation was requested from an issuer (AS node)
mapping(address => uint256) public lastAttestationRequested;
// Tracks the last time an attestation was completed by an issuer
mapping(address => uint256) public lastAttestationCompleted;
// Tracks the last time an issuer was last slashed
mapping(address => uint256) public lastSlashed;
```

A slashing event may occur when the slashing initiator calls `slash()` with the slashable address. Before slashing, the slashing contract checks the following:

1. The validator has been elected continuously for the past `B` blocks.
2. The issuer was selected for at least one attestation in the past `B` blocks.
3. The validator wasn't slashed by the `AttestationSlasher` within the past `B` blocks.
4. The address hasn't completed an attestation in the past `B` blocks.
5. The addres hasn't submitted `SignalOnline` event in the last `S` blocks. (see [below](#signal-online)).

If the validator was intermittently elected, the contract will only consider the past `B` blocks in which the validator was *continuously* elected. For example, if a validator with a downed attestation node was elected for .5 `B` blocks, was unelected, and re-elected for .5 `B` blocks, then it will not be eligible for slashing since the slasher restarts counting when the validator was re-elected. Additionally, if the validator was elected but was never selected to provide an attestation in the entire period of `B` blocks, then they are not eligible for slashing.

### Signal online

In the unlikely event that a validator was never selected for an attestation during the period of `B` blocks, it's possible for a malicious actor to request multiple attestations with the goal of randomly getting paired with this validator and intentionally leaving the attestation incomplete. To prevent this, we're building into the AS the ability to signal to the `AttestationSlasher` that the service is still online if a slashing event becomes close by signing and submitting a transaction to the slasher contract. The AS will monitor the `AttestationSlasher` contract's state to determine if it's close to getting slashed. This requires that the AS signer key to be minimally funded to pay the gas fees of the transaction, however this adds more piece of mind for validators to be sure they won't be incorrectly slashed. Additionally, we'll be adding two new Prometheus events to the AS to alert a validator when the slashing period is nearly reached and another event to alert when the AS signer key's balance is low.

If we observe that a validator is relying too heavily upon the `SignalOnline` functionality when they're receiving legitimate attestation requests we can add mitigations such as introducing an increasing financial penalty for subsequent signals or by decreasing the time that signal will last for (lowering `S`) per user.

### Requiring Attestation Service

**Note that the slasher expects each validator to be running an Attestation Service.** Unlike today, where it's optional for a Validator to run an attestation node, this proposal would make it mandatory. Having more attestation nodes in the pool improves the security of the phone number verification by making it more difficult to game the random selection of a set of colluding issuers. This proposal recommends providing at least three weeks from time of merge of this CIP to the time of enacting the slashing mechanism to give everyone an opportunity to set up their Attestation Service.

### Nothing at stake problem

Unlike other slashing contracts which use `SlasherUtil.performSlashing()` to both slash _and_ remove the validator, this `AttestationSlasher` would directly call `LockedGold.slash()`, only slashing stake and not removing the validator. This decreases the potential risk of having multiple validators removed simultaneously due to an overly aggressive `AttestationSlasher` policy. If the validator is slashed it may be that their locked stake drops below the `validatorLockedGoldRequirements` (currently 10K CELO). By dropping below `validatorLockedGoldRequirements` alone, the validator is not removed from the validator set but they will cease to earn epoch rewards. If they continue to get slashed by the `AttestationSlasher`, it may be that they drop to a near-zero stake while still remaining to be a validator. This is a dangerous situation, since this validator is performing an important role for the network but has nothing at stake.

To resolve this tension, we'll introduce a new `MinStakeSlasher` which will force a validator to be de-affiliated if their balance drops below the `penalty + reward` threshold of any of the registered slasher contracts. Once a validator has been de-affiliated, they will be removed as an elected validator in the following epoch and they'll need to return their stake amount to the `validatorLockedGoldRequirements` requirement before being able to affiliate again.

### Defining parameters

#### AttestationSlasher

- `B` This will be chosen based on the minimal period that it is likely for a validator to have recieved an attestation request. We'll start conservative and look at a period where every validator should have received 10 attestations. In the month of November 2020, there was an average of 94 attestations requested per day (more in December). Therefore, over 11 days, an average of 1034 attesations would be requested, providing an expected value of ~10 attestations for each of the 100 issuers. Since we produce a block every 5 seconds, 11 days is equivalent to 190,080 blocks.
- `P` Similarly we'll start conservatively with the amount of stake slashed. At the time of writing this, only two active validators have an excess stake of less than 100 CELO (85 CELO each). If we set a penalty of 40 CELO, then these validators can be slashed twice before incurring any loss in epoch rewards.
- `R` The reward for slashing should cover both the gas costs as well as the infrastructure costs to monitor for offenses.

#### MinStakeSlasher

- `P` The penalty is only the slasher reward (no additional penalty) since the validator has already been slashed to get to this point.
- `R` Similarly, the reward for slashing should cover both the gas costs as well as the infrastructure costs to monitor for offenses.

### Steps

1. Author, test, audit, and publish `AttestationSlasher` and `MinStakeSlasher`.
2. Update the attestation contract via governance proposal to write request/completion status to the `AttestationSlasher` contract.
3. Build monitoring and a dashboard for this contract state. Update AS client to monitor and protect against slashing events.
4. Call LockedGold's `addSlasher()` via governance proposal to enable the new slashers.

## Other solutions considered

### Guilty until proven innocent

The same solution above, but with a challenge/response pattern. Rather than providing a proof of outage, a slasher would simply claim that a validator's AS wasn't available during a certain block interval and provide stake to back this claim. If the validator to-be-slashed can provide a proof that they either did complete an attestation or that they were unelected during the interval, then they wouldn't get slashed and would be rewarded with the would-be-slashers stake. The benefit of this approach is that the proof size and validation is much smaller and would lower the gas consumption. The downside is that this requires the AS to monitor for malicious slashes and provide a proof to rebute it, which introduces more complexity (the monitor must be funded and highly available).

### Uptime Score

One proposal was to use the uptime score as the main incentive mechanism. In this model, a long outage in the Attestation Service would also have weight on a Validator's uptime score. The downside of this approach is that it would require a hardfork to implement. Given that this is just the first stop on a long iteration process, we decided to go with something adjustable with a higher turnaround process.

### Using completion rate

Instead of using a min-completion count, we could use the total rate of completion to reward or punish a validator. This was decided against until we have strong confidence in the completion rate metric. It's possible for a simple metric to be gamed by malicious actors. We also want the metric to reflect the difference between a user not having received the SMS vs quiting the flow prematurely. We also need more users onboarding before we can build confidence in this metric. We view the min-completion count as the first step in this direction.

### Foundation votes

The Foundation holds a large amount of Celo and uses it [today to incentivize behavior to support a healthy network](https://docs.celo.org/validator-guide/celo-foundation-voting-policy). The Foundation voting does already check that validators are running a highly available attestation service; however we felt that there should be an additional incentive for the following reasons:

1. Some validators are not eligible for foundation votes. We need the solution to apply to all validators to improve the overall AS availability.
2. Voting frequency is every 3 months, which is not immediate enough to motivate an operator to regularly monitor and maintain their AS availability.

### Governance Slashing

We have a generic slashing contract which allows anyone to slash for any reason via a governance proposal. This process is good for one-off slashing events, but requires a large amount of coordination for each event. We wanted to build something more automatic where the rules are stated explicitly ahead of time.
