---
cip: 10
title: General Account Signer Authorization
author: Nam Chu Hoai (@nambrot), Khoa Phan (@kphed), Eko Mirhard (@eko-mirhard), Alex Harley (@alexbharley)
discussions-to: https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/issues/76
status: Draft
type: Standards
category: Ring 1
created: 2020-05-15
license: Apache 2.0
---

## Simple Summary

Generalizes the Celo Core Contract `Accounts.sol` signer authorization to be:

1. Friendly to smart contract signers
2. Allow applications built on Celo to specify their own authorization domains
3. Permit multiple signers per authorization domain
4. Permit multiple authorization domains per signer.

## Abstract

The Celo Core Contracts include `Accounts.sol` which provides a higher level account abstraction than provided by the fork from Ethereum. Part of that is the ability for accounts to authorize other addresses to act on their behalf. In the current version of Celo Core Contracts, domains that can be authorized are voting, validating and attestations.

Celo stakeholders have enjoyed the ability to segment responsabilities into different keys as that allows for different custodying patterns. That being said, the current implementations comes with limitations around 1) what accounts and 2) which domains can be authorized. This CIP tries to generalize both.

## Motivation

The `Accounts.sol` smart contract houses a general account abstraction that currently services the following purposes:

- Acts as the canonical account for the Proof-of-Stake system (aka LockedGold account)
- Keeps track of authorized signer keys in the PoS system (validator, voter, and attestation signers)
- Stores basic profile information such as a name and mapping to `dataEncryptionKey` and `walletAddress`
- Entry into an account's off-chain metadata

Over the past months, it has become noticeable that especially the authorization of signer keys by the "account key" is a very useful method to authenticate the "account owner" without having to unnecessarily bring the "account key" online which is the most privileged, and thus most important to secure. Example of such cases have been:

- The signing of the off-chain data should ideally not happen with the account key. During the development of the `ReleaseGold` smart contract it has been found that smart contracts as accounts cannot sign metadata. As a workaround, verifying metadata has been adjusted to allow any authorized signer to sign the payload, which violates the intention behind having well scoped authorized signers in the first place.
- As part of ODIS, accounts have to authenticate with the ODIS signers for rate-limiting purposes. To do that, the "account key" or the "authorized DEK" has to sign the request which also violates the intention of keeping keys that can move funds as cold as possible.
- For other applications such as CIP8 or other down-the-road applications, specific keys are going to be useful. Additionally, the `dataEncryptionKey` seems out of place without useful segmentation ability, despite it being effectively also an authorized key (if not signer).

Allowing the segmentation of domains for a Celo account (i.e. an account on `Accounts.sol`) gives Celo stakeholders more flexibility in their custody setup. It allows sensitive domains (like moving balances) to be only accessible by keys that are "cold", i.e. harder to compromise, while making less sensitive domains more user friendly. Expanding such segmentation aids the user experience, both of interacting with the Celo Core Contracts themselves (via authorized smart contracts), as well as dapps that currently would need to copy this authorization scheme to receive similar benefits for their users. While this CIP does not specify further applications, per-dapp-authorizations can become practical.

## Specification

The proposed changes to `Accounts.sol`:

- Introduce a `defaultSigners` struct that represents an indexed mapping of signers for an account
- Add getters and setters for the `defaultSigners` struct in the form of `hasDefaultSigner`, `isDefaultSigner`, `getDefaultSigner` and `setDefaultSigner`
- Add a `signerAuthorizations` struct that stores the mapping of authorized signers on a per role basis for an account
  ```
  struct SignerAuthorization {
    bool started;
    bool completed;
  }
  mapping(bytes32 => mapping(address => SignerAuthorization)) public signerAuthorizations
  ```
- Add generalized `authorizeSigner(address signer, bytes32 role)` and `completeSignerAuthorization(address account, bytes32 role)` methods for smart contract authorizations (`authorizeSigner` creates a pending authorization that `completeSignerAuthorization` completes)
- Add a generalized `authorizeSignerWithSignature(address signer, bytes32 role, uint8 v, bytes32 r, bytes32 s)` for proof-of-possession-based authorization
- Add getters and setters for the `authorizedSigners` struct in the form of `isSigner(address account, address signer, bytes32 role)` and `removeSigner(address signer, bytes32 role)`.

These methods should continue the invariant that a signer is only authorized by a single account ever, however, we are relaxing the invariant that a signer can only be authorized for at most one role.

To explicitly retain backwards compatability for existing consumers, the default write methods will special case the roles of, vote, attestation and and validator keys with the hashed roles `celo.org/core/vote`, `celo.org/core/attestation` and `celo.org/core/validator` respectively. Similarly, the `getDefaultSigner` method would read from `accounts` in this case.

The existing `authorize${X}Signer` should write to all structs, with the `has${X}Signer` and `get${X}Signer` methods continuing to read from the existing `accounts` and `authorizedBy` structs. In some future in which all possible signer authorizations are using `signerAuthorizations`, the `accounts` struct can be deprecated.

One notable exception will remain in authorizing the `validation` signer. The existing `authorizeValidatorSignerWithPublicKey` and `authorizeValidatorSignerWithKeys` methods remain to update keys on the `Validators.sol` contract.

## Rationale

Since this change can be done in a backwards compatible manner, it should be to minimize the impact on the remainder of the smart contract system. Implementing contracts (like `LockedGold` or `Attestations`) can upgrade at their own pace.

Celo stakeholders like @brad-larson also expressed their interested in having signers be authorized by several different accounts. However, the current invariant of a signer being authorized ever by only one account is critical currently and harder to remove (while not impossible and thus can be done in a future CIP). However, with this CIP, Celo should be able to remove the invariant that one signer can only be authorized for one role.

What's mostly left unspecified is a name-spacing scheme. While very useful and important, it can be done separately. For now, a simple URL-based scheme could suffice and open the door for future standardizations via URLs similar to JSON-schemas (another place for such standardization is relevant is CIP8 schemas).

## Backwards Compatability

As mentioned above, this CIP aims to make backwards compatible changes.

## Test Cases

Celo Core Contract unit tests will maintain the invariants currently expected by consumers of `Accounts.sol`.

## Security Considerations

`Accounts.sol` is a core piece of the Celo platform and as such as wide-ranging impact on the functionality of it. `Accounts.sol` ultimately determines they keys that will be participating in the consensus protocol, eligible voters in the Proof-of-Stake and identity protocol. As mentioned above, the requirements to `Accounts.sol` are expected to remain unchanged, but failure to do so could have significant consequences upon the security of the Celo platform.
