---
cip: 54
title: Community rewards go to reserve if undercollaterized
author: Paul Lange (@palango)
discussions-to: https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/discussions/363
status: Accepted
type: Standards Track
category: Ring 0
created: 2023-03-03
license: Apache 2.0
---

## Simple Summary

Simplify the epoch rewards by never sending funds designated for the community fund to the stable coin reserve instead.

## Abstract

A part of the epoch rewards is sent to the community fund. However, in the case of the stable coin reserve being undercollateralized, those funds are sent to the reserve instead. This CIP proposes to never send funds designated for the community fund to the reserve.

## Motivation

The stable coins, and with them the underlying reserve, are now maintained by Mento. As an independent entity, it should not directly receive funds designated for the community fund.

Additionally the protocol gets simplified by reducing the number of conditional actions.

## Specification

During the distribution of epoch rewards, it will not be checked if the stable coin reserve is undercollateralized. Instead, funds designated for the community fund will always be sent there.

## Rationale

See Motivation.

## Backwards Compatibility

This changes the consensus rules and therefore needs to be enabled as part of a hardfork.

## Implementation

Epoch rewards are distributed in the `distributeCommunityRewards` function. There `epoch_rewards.IsReserveLow` is used to decide if the reserve is undercollateralized.

This function and dependent code are to be removed and the funds will be minted for the community fund instead.

This changes the consensus rules and therefore needs to be enabled as part of a hardfork.

Draft PR: https://github.com/celo-org/celo-blockchain/pull/2030

## Security Considerations

No security implications are known.

## License
This work is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
