---
cip: 0004 
title: Protocol Hotfixing Through Governance
author: Brice Wang <@bricewang>, Tim Moreton <@timmoreton> and Yorke Rhodes <yorhodes>
discussions-to: 
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Ring 1
created: 2019-10-28
license: Apache 2.0
---

## Overview

This document addresses the open question raised in the On-Chain Governance design document regarding the need to quickly and discreetly address newly discovered protocol vulnerabilities through governance.

On-chain governance provides a mechanism for stakeholders to fairly and openly deliberate over proposed changes to the protocol. While these qualities contribute to its effectiveness in handling minor, routine updates, it is ill-suited to patch protocol-threatening vulnerabilities. The reason is two-fold. Because proposals are on-chain, any bad actor could view the patch and potentially reverse-engineer the exploit, abusing it before the patch is applied. And because the proposal life cycle is long to offer sufficient time for stakeholders to consider the proposals, attackers have ample time to cause irreversible damage.

## Goals

- Quickly and accurately address zero-day reports
- Implement a system resilient to abuse 
- Maintain user confidence in the network
- Handle related legal issues and optics concerns

## Proposed Solution

Zero-day vulnerability reports are directed off-chain to the Celo Foundation, which coordinates with committers to verify the issue and build a hotfix. They show the hotfix to a trusted third-party auditor, likely a reputable security firm, to verify its legitimacy and that the patch does indeed fix the issue. With the auditor’s attestation, they reach out to the validators off-chain using metadata managed as proposed in [CIP 3](0003.md) with the auditor’s attestation to convince them to apply the hotfix.

### Hotfixes for Celo Core Contracts

A hotfix for vulnerabilities in the Celo smart contracts takes the form of a governance proposal, but it does not follow the standard proposal procedure. 

Once a validator is convinced that the hotfix is legitimate, the validator calls a function in Governance to whitelist the hotfix’s hash. The validity of the hash is also corroborated by the auditor, as the validator is not shown the plaintext hotfix. When `2f+1` of the validators have whitelisted the hash, the hotfix can be executed through Governance immediately.

Each validator as well as the `approver` address can call `whitelistHotfix(hash)` in Governance to add their address for a given hash. 
To minimize single-epoch coordination amongst validators, whitelists are persistent across epochs. This design decision requires a whitelist tally to be computed for a specific epoch (and correspondingly a given set of validators). 

Calling `prepareHotfix(hash)` computes this tally from the current validator set, and if the count exceeds the Byzantine Quorum `2f+1` given the current `numberValidatorsInCurrentSet`, marks the hash prepared for the current epoch. 

Calling `executeHotfix(proposal)` computes the hash of a proposal. If the hash...
- has been whitelisted by the `approver`
- is marked prepared for the current epoch 
- is not marked executed

then the proposal is executed and the hash is marked executed accordingly. 

Separating the `prepare` and `execute` hotfix phases has the additional benefit of thwarting gas competition between the iterative quorum computation and the iterative transaction execution.

### Hotfixes for Celo Blockchain

The hotfix takes the form of a software update. Once a validator is convinced that the hotfix is legitimate, the validator applies the software update. Once `2f+1` of the validators have updated, the hotfix is essentially applied to the network.

Subsequently, the remaining validators and full nodes can be forced to upgrade via use of the `minimumClientVersion` parameter in the `BlockchainParams` contract, which is governable, and so can be changed via a regular governance proposal.

### Validator responsibilities

This procedure requires enough validators to share a means of being reached off-chain by the Foundation, which is currently not strictly enforced on-chain. To solve this, validator groups will be encouraged to prioritize validators who provide contact information encrypted with the Foundation’s public key, opening the needed channel of communication without exposing themselves to DoS attacks. 

Validators will need to be able to verify the authenticity of the auditor’s attestation so that they are confident that the hotfix addresses a legitimate vulnerability, solves it properly, and does not make any unrelated changes. For smart contract vulnerabilities, they will need to whitelist the hash, which involves a function call in Governance exposed through a CLI command.

Notably, the procedure does not ask validators to check the hotfix themselves or perform any other on-chain actions. This limits the spread of information about the exploit and minimizes the window of opportunity between notification of the hotfix through insecure channels and its application.

## Risks

* Validators are unreachable in a timely fashion - mitigated via [CIP 3](0003.md)
* Validators cannot be convinced of the veracity of a fix - mitigated by Celo Foundation enlisting auditors and publishing their public keys in a well-known location, and auditors signing the report linking a vulnerability to a proposal hash.
* Validators collude to modify the network -- in any case, BFT assumes `2f+1` honest validators.
* Committers and auditors collude -- Celo Foundation should vet and appoint auditors. Foundation should be involved in teraction between auditors and committers. `approvers` multisig must be set such that individual committers cannot whitelist proposals. 

## Implementation

* To follow.

g8t
