---
cip: 43
title: Block Context
author: Joshua Gutow <@trianglesphere>
discussions-to: https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/issues/265
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Ring 0
created: 2021-08-11
license: Apache 2.0
---


## Simple Summary
Common read-only system contract calls should refer to the state at the end of the previous block instead of the current state.

## Abstract
Common read only core contract calls such as `getGasPriceMinimum`, `isFrozen`, `medianRate` should use that state at the end of the previous block rather than the current state that was executed after the previous transaction. This allows calls to `getGasPriceMinimum` to be cached. When a user pays for gas fees in a non-native fee currency, it performs a currency conversion that could be modified by a sorted oracles update. Therefore, the `medianRate` contract call (for `getGasPriceMinimum`) must be made for every transaction to ensure transaction validity.

## Motivation
There is a lot of interaction between the layer 1 client and the core contracts on the Celo platform. Calls to the core contracts made by Celo itself are occaionsally referred to as __system contract calls__. There are both read and write system contract calls. Some examples of these are checking that the gas price of a transaction is greater than the gas price minimum, converting between CELO and cUSD when checking the gas price minimum, checking that a currency has transfers enabled, updating the randomness beacon, perfoming the validator election, etc. There are quite a lot of ways that the Celo client interacts with contracts. This CIP seeks to specify the behavior of read-only contract calls that are used to check the validity of a transaction & used in the process of setting the gas price.

By specifying the state that these system contract calls are made from, it is possible to cache the result of the call rather than having to perform it for every transaction. In practice this is an important optimization to enable a higher transaction throughput.

## Specification
The following contract calls, when performed by the system to check transaction validity, shall be run against the state at the end of the previous block. The current behavior is to use the state at the end of the previous transaction.
- `getGasPriceMinimum`
- `intrinsicGasForAlternativeFeeCurrency`
- `getWhitelist`

## Rationale
These are the read only contract calls made by the client to check the validity of a transaction. As such they can be trivially cached if they all operate on the same state. Being able to cache these calls (done by the system) significantly reduces the overhead on each transaction. Keeping the current state rules and implementing a cache on top of that could be done, but the extra complexity would be significant. This significantly simplifies a much more performant implementation (even if contract call were speed up, doing nothing is still better).


## Backwards Compatibility
This will introduce a change in the transaction processing rules; however, it is unlikely that users will notice as this has the effect of moving transactions that change the results of these contract calls to the end of the block.

## Test Cases
TODO

## Implementation
Not yet implemented.

## Security Considerations

Before this CIP, it was possible to update the exchange rate at any point in a block which could cause fees to be paid out differently. This removes that ability which could result in an exchange rate being off. However, it was also possible to reorder the oracle update transaction which could result in the same effect.


## License
This work is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
