---
cip: 37
title: Unambiguous name for ERC-20 on Celo chain
author: Aaron Deruvo <@aaronmgdr>, Martin Chrzanowski <@m-chrzan>
discussions-to: https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/issues/181
status: Final
type: Informational
created: 2021-03-06
license: Apache 2.0
---


## Simple Summary
Standardize on a name for ERC-20 tokens on the CELO blockchain that makes it clear these are not ERC-20 tokens on Ethereum. This is a branding and consumer clarity proposal more than an actual code proposal. 


## Abstract
Refer to ERC-20 tokens on Celo `cERC-20`. This distinguishes it while following the same convention of prepending `c` like `cUSD` or `cEUR` alternative could be `CRC-20`


## Motivation
Referring to ERC-20 tokens on Celo as just ERC-20 could lead to massive numbers of people trying to send these tokens to Etherum and vice versa. We already see this happening with the CELO token and will only become more of an issue with more tokens being created on the Celo chain. 
 

## Specification
N/A

## Rationale
The ERC-20 standard while originally created on Ethereum has been implemented in various forms on several blockchains including TRC-20 on TRON and BEP-20 on Binance smart chain, at least. Each of these names may communicate that these are not the same as the ERC-20 tokens to general users while also hinting towards developers the underlying shared interface. 

## Backwards Compatibility
N/A

## Test Cases
N/A

## Implementation
I do not see the need for any code changes (although I may be incorrect here). Rather, this will require an update to the official docs at docs.celo.org, celo.org, and for all project in the Celo community to update how they refer to their support for cERC-20.  

docs.celo.org would be updated to explain that `cERC-20` follow the same interface as ERC-20 on Ethereum yet are on the Celo network. 


## Security Considerations
Less confusion is more secure.

## License
This work is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
