---
cip: 47
title: Round Change Timeout Formula Modification
author: Joshua Gutow <@trianglesphere>
discussions-to: https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/issues/279
status: Draft
type: Standards Track, Ring 0
created: 8/23/21
license: Apache 2.0
---

## Simple Summary
Add five seconds to the round change timeout for rounds greater or equal to 1.

## Abstract
Add five seconds to the round change timeout for rounds greater or equal to 1. This modifies the timeout schedule to make the timeouts for round 1 & 2 be longer than round 0.


## Motivation
The round change timeout is the amount of time that a validator node waits to before moving onto the next round in IBFT. This only occurs if a block is not finalized prior to the timeout. This timeout is exponential to enable nodes with differing clocks and poor network connections to be able to stabilize on the same round. In cases where the block is not able to be finalized in round 0, rounds 1 and 2 have a lower timeout meaning that the block is unlikely to finalized until round 3.

## Specification
```
Round 0:             timeout = baseTimeout + block time
Round n where n > 0: timeout = baseTimeout + block time + 2^n * backoff factor
```

Table (times in seconds)
```
Round	  old      new
0	    8	     8
1	    5	    10
2	    7	    12
3	   11	    16
4	   19	    24
5	   35	    40
6	   67	    72
7	  131	   136
8	  259	   264
9	  515	   520
10	 1027	  1032
```

## Rationale
The round change timeout formula could be any exponential formula with any starting value. This formula was chosen to keep the round 0 timeout the same as it seems to be working well, but ensure that the next couple rounds give validators more time before moving onto the next round. It then transitions to be exponential.


## Backwards Compatibility
This only affects validator nodes, but a change in the formula would reduce the stability of consensus if validators did not use the same formula.

## Test Cases
See the specification table.

## Implementation
[Example implementation](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-blockchain/pull/1676)

## Security Considerations
This increases the amount of time that it takes to produce block there are two or three validator nodes that are next to each other in the proposing order and if all of the validators are offline. This is inherent to IBFT, but this increases the amount of time before moving onto the next proposer. 

## License
This work is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
